
Uh-uh, fuck that (fuck that)


Eight doobies to the face, fuck that
12 bottles in the case, nigga, fuck that
Two pills and a half-weight, nigga, fuck that
Got a high tolerance when your age don't exist


Man, I swear my nigga trippin' off that shit again
Pick him up, then I set him in cold water
Then I order someone to bring him Vicodin
I hope that take the pain away
From the feelin' that he felt today
You know, when you part of Section.80
And you feel like no one can relate
'Cause you are, you are, a loner, loner
Marijuana endorphins make you stronger, stronger
I'm in the house party, trippin' off
My generation sippin' cough syrup like it's water
Never no pancakes in the kitchen
Man, not one of our lives is caught up
In the daily superstition that the world is 'bout to end
Who gives a fuck? We never do listen
'Less it comes with a 808 (A melody and some hoes)
PlayStation and some drank (Technology bought my soul)
Lookin' around and all I see
Is a big crowd that's product of me
And they probably relatives relevant for a rebel's dream
Yep, her president is black, she black too
Purple label on her back, but that tab is light blue
She take it straight to the head
Then she look at me, she got A.D.H.D


Eight doobies to the face, fuck that
12 bottles in the case, nigga, fuck that
Two pills and a half-weight, nigga, fuck that
Got a high tolerance when your age don't exist


Like whoa-whoa, whoa, whoa-whoa
(Don't got a limit, just give me some more with it)
Whoa, whoa-whoa
(Don't got a limit, just give me some more with it)
Whoa, whoa-whoa, whoa, whoa-whoa
(They always told me A.D.H.D did it)


And then she started…
And then she started feelin' herself
Like no one else in this apartment
"Beg your pardon?" "Oh, I rap, baby."
"How old are you?", She say 22, I say 23
"Okay, then we are crack babies."
"Damn, why you say that?" She said, "Where my drink at?"
"I'ma tell you later, just tell your neighbors and the police relax."
I stood up, shut the blind, closed the screen; Jumbotron
Made to the back where she reside
Then she said, "Read between the lines."
Yep, hope that I get close enough when the lights turn down
And the fact that she just might open up
When the Nuvo start to drown her body and I know
The both of us really deep in the mood now
It's nothin' we can do now
Somebody walked in with a pound of that Bay Area kush
She looked at me, then looked at it
And then she grabbed it, then she said, "Get it understood."
"You know why we crack babies?
Because we born in the '80s, that A.D.H.D crazy."


Eight doobies to the face, fuck that
12 bottles in the case, nigga, fuck that
Two pills and a half-weight, nigga, fuck that
Got a high tolerance when your age don't exist


Like whoa-whoa, whoa, whoa-whoa
(Don't got a limit, just give me some more with it)
Whoa, whoa-whoa
(Don't got a limit, just give me some more with it)
Whoa, whoa-whoa, whoa, whoa-whoa
(They always told me A.D.H.D did it)


You can have all my shine, I'll give you the light
Double cup, deuce, four, six, just mix it in Sprite
Ecstasy, 'shrooms, blow, 'dro, hoes, whatever you like
You can have all my shine, I'll give you the light


What's your life about? Enlighten me
Is you gon' live on your knees or die on your feet?
It's fire in the street, fire in my Swisher
Fire in between the two legs of your lil' sister
Just get a sip of this elixir
Before they crop us out of the picture
I've never seen a crop circle
But I've seen cops circle the block
I puff squares, but I swear, one day, I'ma stop
My nerves itch
On the brink of my career
While my peers struggle for employment
Can you hear these screams?
(Uncle Sam ain't no kin to me) One, two
Three four grams and a fifth of Hennessy
A bad bitch, fuck the penitentiary
Section 80s babies, blame Ronald Reagan
We raising hell, hell (Oh)
Lord forbid, the homie got wet, so we trying to soak it in
The president is black, but you can't vote for skin
You vote for the better man
Come to our show, you can see the diversity
Unify the people, they gon' peep it universally
We might not change the world
But we gon' manipulate it, I hope you participatin'
Ayo, Dot, won't you let these cats know?
We knew we'd be here, like, back in 04'
Started HiiiPower because our generation needed a generator
In a system meant to disintegrate us (Ooh!)
And all we do is assist them
We're not victors, we're victims
The bigger picture isn't developed yet
Like, what if Keisha was celibate?
Or what if Tammy came across a real man
Who didn't play games like children?
My nigga cheated on his girlfriend
With his girlfriend's girlfriend, let the world end
And everybody tripping off 2012
And the extraterrestrial presence as well
(Odd Future's aight) But our future is not
That martial law shit drop, we gon' all get got
So keep that question mark on your face
Eat your fast food, use your fluoride toothpaste
Hide your feelings from the public, work your lil' nine to five
Don't forget to pay your tithes and thank God you're alive
HiiiPower
And on another note
We focused like the Hubble Telescope
Soul!


Life is a traffic jam, life is a traffic jam
Life is a traffic jam
Life is a traffic jam, life is a traffic jam
Life is a traffic jam, life is a traffic jam
I'm ready to go, ready to go
Life is a traffic jam, life is a traffic jam
Ready to go, ready to go
Life is a traffic jam
Life...


I wrote this because I was ordered to
People say I speak for generation Y
Why lie, I do, Section 80
Your son will play me if the radio won't
Daughters that just turn 1 'til 21 listen to Kendrick
For instance:
What's your life about? Enlighten me
Is you gon' live on your knees or die on your feet?
Take out that student loan, and pay off your college degree
And do exactly what you see on TV
True story!
Hmm
Can you repeat that for me, Soul?
What's your life about? Enlighten me
Is you gon' live on your knees or die on your feet?
Is you gon' plead the fifth or sound the horn?
The time is now, my child, come on
See, a lot of y'all don't understand Kendrick Lamar
Because you wonder how I could talk about money, hoes, clothes, God, and history all in the same sentence
You know what all the things have in common?
Only half of the truth, if you tell it
See I spent 23 years on this earth searching for answers
'Til one day I realized I had to come up with my own
I'm not on the outside looking in
I'm not on the inside looking out
I'm in the dead fucking center, looking around
You ever seen a newborn baby kill a grown man?
That's an analogy for the way the world make me react
My innocence been dead
So, the next time I talk about money, hoes, clothes, God, and history all in the same sentence
Just know I meant it, and you felt it
'Cause you too are searching for answers
I'm not the next pop star, I'm not the next socially-aware rapper
I am a human motherfucking being over dope-ass instrumentation
Kendrick Lamar!
Now fuck 'em up, Terrace!
(Soul!)




I watch this fire that we’re gathered around
And see that it burns similar to the fire that’s inside you
Section.80
Section.80 babies
A generation of bliss and disobedience
Know they can't control us
Know they can't control you
Know they can't control us
But we can control each other
We build our own world
If you don't leave with nothing else tonight
You will leave with knowing yourself
You will leave knowing that you represent something that's bigger than all of us
Our family
Heart, honor, and respect
This is you
This is me
And we are HiiiPower




She looks better than Beyonce, Alicia Keys, Halle Berry, Miss Jolie
Where's she from? No I.D. (That girl's an alien)
And if I die before I wake, I pray that I'm in outer space
UFO fly away (So let's go-go, go-go, let's go-go, go-go)


She got me going, I'm all in
Fifty stories, I'm falling
Where you been? Is it planet Mars?
Far beyond the stars? Are you a Martian?
You're unfamiliar but still, I feel ya
Energy sending me towards the ceiling
I'm high now, are you up there?
If you was, I would climb every other stair
I gotta stare, I mean wow
And I'm wowed, no one compares
A one-on-one, you must have won
Every pageant in America when you was young


Lips, hips, hair drips down her back
(Crazy) Body frame (Crazy) Insane (Crazy)
The only girl that can make time
Then make me, stop...


She looks better than Beyonce, Alicia Keys, Halle Berry, Miss Jolie
Where's she from? No I.D. (That girl's an alien)
And if I die before I wake, I pray that I'm in outer space
UFO fly away (So let's go-go, go-go, let's go-go, go-go)


So now we on, so now we going
Living in the city of the unknown
I show her off, I stunt with her
We do it sweet, they look bitter
Look at her get up, I hear 'em say
But why him? I hear 'em hate
I laugh at it rather than jab at it
Then continue eternal life as a crack addict
'Cause I'm addicted, and you the drug
Cold turkey? No sir
You gotta be an Odyssey from heaven and above
You definitely know, probably I gotta give it up


Lips, hips, hair drips down her back
(Crazy) Body frame (Crazy) Insane (Crazy)
The only girl that can make time
Then make me, stop...


She looks better than Beyonce, Alicia Keys, Halle Berry, Miss Jolie
Where's she from? No I.D. (That girl's an alien)
And if I die before I wake, I pray that I'm in outer space
UFO fly away (So let's go-go, go-go, let's go-go, go-go)


You something different, I'm glad I found you
So pretty, I'll never do anything to hurt you



Alls my life I has to fight, nigga
Alls my life I...
Hard times like, "Yah!"
Bad trips like, "Yah!"
Nazareth, I'm fucked up
Homie, you fucked up
But if God got us, then we gon' be alright


Nigga, we gon' be alright
Nigga, we gon' be alright
We gon' be alright
Do you hear me, do you feel me? We gon' be alright
Nigga, we gon' be alright
Huh? We gon' be alright
Nigga, we gon' be alright
Do you hear me, do you feel me? We gon' be alright


Uh, and when I wake up
I recognize you're looking at me for the pay cut
But homicide be looking at you from the face down
What MAC-11 even boom with the bass down?
Schemin', and let me tell you 'bout my life
Painkillers only put me in the twilight
Where pretty pussy and Benjamin is the highlight
Now tell my momma I love her, but this what I like, Lord knows
Twenty of 'em in my Chevy, tell 'em all to come and get me
Reaping everything I sow, so my karma come in heaven
No preliminary hearings on my record
I'm a motherfucking gangster in silence for the record, uh
Tell the world I know it's too late
Boys and girls, I think I gone cray
Drown inside my vices all day
Won't you please believe when I say


Wouldn't you know
We been hurt, been down before
Nigga, when our pride was low
Lookin' at the world like, "Where do we go?"
Nigga, and we hate po-po
Wanna kill us dead in the street fo sho'
Nigga, I'm at the preacher's door
My knees gettin' weak, and my gun might blow
But we gon' be alright


Nigga, we gon' be alright
Nigga, we gon' be alright
We gon' be alright
Do you hear me, do you feel me? We gon' be alright
Nigga, we gon' be alright
Huh? We gon' be alright
Nigga, we gon' be alright
Do you hear me, do you feel me? We gon' be alright


What you want you, a house⁠? You, a car?
40 acres and a mule? A piano, a guitar?
Anything, see my name is Lucy, I'm your dog
Motherfucker, you can live at the mall
I can see the evil, I can tell it, I know it's illegal
I don't think about it, I deposit every other zero
Thinking of my partner, put the candy, paint it on the Regal
Digging in my pocket, ain't a profit big enough to feed you
Every day my logic get another dollar just to keep you
In the presence of your chico... Ah!
I don't talk about it, be about it, every day I sequel
If I got it then you know you got it, Heaven, I can reach you
Pat Dawg, Pat Dawg, Pat Dawg, my dog, that's all
Bick back and Chad, I trap the bag for y'all
I rap, I black on track so rest assured
My rights, my wrongs; I write 'til I'm right with God


Wouldn't you know
We been hurt, been down before
Nigga, when our pride was low
Lookin' at the world like, "Where do we go?"
Nigga, and we hate po-po
Wanna kill us dead in the street fo sho'
Nigga, I'm at the preacher's door
My knees gettin' weak, and my gun might blow
But we gon' be alright


Nigga, we gon' be alright
Nigga, we gon' be alright
We gon' be alright
Do you hear me, do you feel me? We gon' be alright
Nigga, we gon' be alright
Huh? We gon' be alright
Nigga, we gon' be alright
Do you hear me, do you feel me? We gon' be alright


I keep my head up high
I cross my heart and hope to die
Lovin' me is complicated
Too afraid of a lot of changes
I'm alright, and you're a favorite
Dark nights in my prayers


I remembered you was conflicted
Misusing your influence, sometimes I did the same
Abusing my power, full of resentment
Resentment that turned into a deep depression
Found myself screamin' in the hotel room
I didn't wanna self-destruct
The evils of Lucy was all around me
So I went runnin' for answers
The hardest thing for me to do
Is to get you, to know me, within sixteen bars
That's the hardest thing


Who is K. Dot? A young nigga from Compton
On the curb writing raps next to a gunshot
On the corners where the gangsters and the killers dwell
The fraudulent tender scars that get unveiled
Everyone I knew was either Crip or Piru
Cousins in elementary, relatives in high school
With that being said, each one of their rivals
Was aiming something at my head, I needed survival
Got jumped, got jacked, shot at, shot back
And I don't even push a line, I'm just tryna push these rhymes
In the midst of staying neutral and discrete
My momma said you're judged by the company you keep
But what you can consider, that if it goes down
They'll kill you if you kill me, it gets deep nigga
So if you ask what I'm doing
I'm tryna duck the influence of my city that's brewing, real talk, and


This is why they fuck with me (real talk nigga, believe it)
This is why they fuck with me (do what I do, ya know?)
I'm no gangster, no killer, I'm just your average Joe (know that)
But one thing you should consider, I'm the realest you know


I was walking from Centennial
When an unidentified vehicle rolled up, and I was like "hol' up"
"Where you from?" I don't bang
"Where you stay?" Westside, that's a Piru gang to be exact
Well aware they had blue across they hat
Dropped backpack and ran inside of the cul-de-sac
Shots rang out, hoping to God I wasn't wet
Crossed across Rosecrans and ran inside of the yet
Chirped the homies on the I-95, they said they already knew
What happened, and meet 'em outside the garage
Never seen that many guns in my life
I was paranoid like a fiend in the night, but needed revenge
Grabbed the nine-ball, opened up the door, then got in
Somebody said, "fall back, we gon' make these niggas suffer
You my brother like a frat, and that's just to remind you"
Thought about that so long I had failed my finals, fuck, but


This is why they fuck with me (I told you, nigga)
This is why they fuck with me (you fake nigga)
I'm no gangster, no killer, I'm just your average Joe (you fake)
But one thing you should consider, I'm the realest you know


I don't do black music, I don't do white music
I do everyday life music
Give 'em cuts like a nigga pierced a knife through it
You say you through, but I've been through it, now that's cold
And this is for my county building children
In Hub City on hubcaps, no power-steering
I use perseverance in this mad city
Where the niggas drink Remy and hold semis for cutthroats
Bernie Mac died, it's no joke
Don't ask why if you don't know about these killers and thieves
Seven grams of weed, you smoke that, but I'm high off life
I could fall out the sky like twice
And land in the land of the AKs
And the minivans where the fan never on
Cause it's hotter than a lunatic's underarms in a straitjacket
In other words, we get it cracking, but I keep it cool, you know?


This is why they fuck with me (haha)
This is why they fuck with me (real talk)
I'm no gangster, no killer, I'm just your average Joe (come on)
But one thing you should consider, I'm the realest you know


So there you have it
But I'mma leave you with this
An O.G. once told me
A real gangster is either dead or in jail
Or behind the scenes getting real money
I'm gone
Is it wickedness?
Is it weakness?
You decide
Are we gonna live or die?


So I was takin' a walk the other day
And I seen a woman—a blind woman
Pacin' up and down the sidewalk
She seemed to be a bit frustrated
As if she had dropped somethin' and
Havin' a hard time findin' it
So after watchin' her struggle for a while
I decide to go over and lend a helping hand, you know?
"Hello ma'am, can I be of any assistance?
It seems to me that you have lost something
I would like to help you find it."
She replied: "Oh yes, you have lost something
You've lost… your life."

{Gunshot}


Is it wickedness?


Lamar stated his views on police brutality
With that line in the song, quote:
"And we hate the popo, wanna kill us in the street fo' sho'."
Oh please, ugh, I don't like it


Uh, Martin had a dream
Martin had a dream
Kendrick have a dream


All my life I want money and power
Respect my mind or die from lead shower
I pray my dick get big as the Eiffel Tower
So I can fuck the world for seventy-two hours


Goddamn I feel amazin', damn, I'm in the Matrix
My mind is livin' on cloud nine and this 9 is never on vacation
Start up that Maserati and – vroom-vroom! – I'm racin'
Poppin' pills in the lobby and I pray they don't find her naked
And I pray you niggas is hatin', shooters go after Judas
Jesus Christ, if I live life on my knees ain't no need to do this
Park it in front of Lueders, next to that Church's Chicken
All you pussies is losers, all my niggas is winners, screamin'—


All my life I want money and power
Respect my mind or die from lead shower
I pray my dick get big as the Eiffel Tower
So I can fuck the world for seventy-two hours


Goddamn I got bitches, damn I got bitches
Damn I got bitches: wifey, girlfriend and mistress
All my life I want money and power
Respect my mind or die from lead showers


I've got 25 lighters on my dresser, yessir
Put fire to that ass, body cast on a stretcher
And her body got that ass that a ruler couldn't measure
And it make me cum fast, but I never get embarrassed
And I recognize you have what I've been wantin' since that record
That Adina Howard had pop it fast to impress her
She rollin', I'm holdin' my scrotum and posin'
This voice here is golden, so fuck y'all, I goes in, and—


All my life I want money and power
Respect my mind or die from lead shower
I pray my dick get big as the Eiffel Tower
So I can fuck the world for seventy-two hours


Goddamn I got bitches, damn I got bitches
Damn I got bitches: wifey, girlfriend and mistress
All my life I want money and power
Respect my mind or, nigga, it's go time


I roll in dough with a good grind
And I run at ho with a baton
That's a relay race with a bouquet
They say, "K, you goin' marry mines."
Beeotch! No way, beeotch! No way
Beeotch! No way, beeotch! Okay
I'm never livin' life confined
As I feel you even if I'm blind
I can tell you who, what, when, where
How to sell your game right on time
Beeotch! Go play, beeotch! Go play
Beeotch! Go play, beeotch! I look like OJ
Killin' everything from pussy to a mothafuckin' Hit-Boy beat
She pussy poppin' and I got options like an audible, I be
C-O-M-P-T-O-N, I win, then ball at your defeat
C-O-M-P-T-O-N, my city, mobbin' in the street, yellin'—


All my life I want money and power
Respect my mind or die from lead shower
I pray my dick get big as the Eiffel Tower
So I can fuck the world for seventy-two hours


Goddamn I got bitches, damn I got bitches
Damn I got bitches, wifey, girlfriend and mistress
All my life I want money and power
Respect my mind or die from lead showers


Let it run, Ali
Martin had a dream
Martin had a dream
Kendrick have a dream
One time
Reporting live
Compton, California


Have you ever felt like, like you never get life?
Like you never did right, sort of like a black sheep?
Back down, backing out your dreams like some bad sleep
Chasing for the wind but you never win the track meet
Oh, what a cold world for a broke nigga, it's bitter
And life's a bitch, don't hit women, so I bit her
I struck enough pain let her know I wasn't playing
I was so sincere like Nas first name, in Belly
They tell me, it's very difficult to see 25
And if I survive it's probably with a celly
My opportunities are low because my brown complexion floats
In the ghetto rather in some heels like Giuseppe's
They want me unemployed, until I hit the streets
Fulfilling voids of broke D-Boys selling weed
Fucking up my prestige, 'til I live with the blues
BB King or the neighbors of Snoop, that's why I'm


In the club like fuck it, though
They say it's only one life, life, life
And if you say I can't live comfortable
I'ma tell you that's a lie, lie, lie
So while I hold this bottle of Ciroc with a hand full of ass
Celebrate the very day that I get past
Through the barbed wire
We are, we are (fine)
We are, we are (true)
Through the, through barbed (wires)
We will, will break (through)
So while I hold this bottle of Ciroc with a hand full of ass
Celebrate the very day that I get past
Through the barbed wire


Have you ever felt like, like you never get life?
Like you never did right, sort of like a black sheep?
Tryna get away from the world's stereotype
Barbed wire got a barricade on your destiny, she desperately
In need of some inspiration, see what the people saying
She gon have a baby then flee from her education
At the age of 16, credit card scam schemes
See a scar on her eye, boyfriend brutality
She'll never get by, no how, no way
Welfare recipient, property of the state
Housing, Section 8, corner store prostitute
The owner bout to prosecute, the niggas tell her that she's cute
Hoodrat trashy, six baby daddies
And this baby daddy is new to the family
Chilling in pajamis, waiting on the first
Fast forward spilling drinks on her fur, that's why she


In the club like fuck it, though
They say it's only one life, life, life
And if you say she can't live comfortable
She gon' tell you that's a lie, lie, lie
So while she up in VIP pouring Merlot in the glass
Celebrate the very day that she get past
Through the barbed wire
We are, we are (fine)
We are, we are (true)
Through the, through barbed (wires)
We will, will break (through)
So while she up in VIP pouring Merlot in the glass
Celebrate the very day that she get past
Through the barbed wire


Have you ever felt like, you finally got life
You finally got right? No longer a black sheep
Living off ya dreams like Christina uh-Milian
In the front seat of a convertible eloping to get married
What a feeling of overcoming the odds
It's like we just hit the lottery, my God
There must be a God, cause golly
You done made it through the fight while squabbling Ali
Now ya lifestyle's looking up and you escaped the crooked cuffs
And you ain't have to kill a nigga just to make a couple bucks
And she ain't have to go and fuck on everybody for a dollar
Making good decisions, got a independent business-mind
And both of y’all are steady grindin', doing it the legal way
Just tryna make a decent pay on every second of the day
But they won't give you the credit, disses out they mouth
You must have joined the Illuminati just to ball out


In the club like fuck it, though
They say it's only one life, life, life
And if you say they can't live comfortable
They gone tell you that's a lie, lie, lie
So even if you overcame doubt and ya living ain't bad
Know it's a barbed wire that's always in your path
Through the barbed wire (just laugh)
Then everybody say...
'Cause I won't get caught again
And I'm here to stop the trends
You can catch me if you try
Disappear into the night
And I'm gone


So you made it past all the barbed wires?
There's one more left *Gunshot*Example:
Artist - "Song"
Rap2 Chainz – "Big Amount" (ft. Drake)
2 Chainz & Lil Wayne - "Bounce"
2 Chainz & Lil Wayne – "Smell Like Money"
2 Chainz & Lil Wayne – "What Happened"
A Boogie Wit Da Hoodie - My Shit
Amine - Caroline
Action Bronson - "Descendant Of The Stars (Travelling The Stars Theme)"
Adrian Younge & Ali Shaheed Muhammad - "Bulletproof Love" Ft. Method Man
Aesop Rock - "Rings"
Aesop Rock - "Kirby"
Apollo Brown & Skyzoo - "Care Packages"
A$AP Ferg - "Let It Bang" ft. ScHoolboy Q
A$AP Ferg - "New Level" ft. Future
A$AP Ferg - "Strive"
A$AP MOB - "Put That On My Set" ft. A$AP Rocky & Skepta
A$AP MOB - "Telephone Calls" ft. Yung Gleesh, Playboi Carti, Tyler, The Creator & A$AP Rocky
Atmosphere - "Won't Look Back" feat. Kim Manning
Banks & Steelz - "Giant""
Bryson Tiller – "Let Me Explain"
Chance The Rapper - "Blessings (Reprise)"
Chance the Rapper - "How Great"
Chance The Rapper - "No Problem" (ft. Lil Wayne & 2 Chainz)
Chance The Rapper - "Summer Friends" (feat. Jeremih & Francis and the Lights)
Danny Brown - "Ain't It Funny"
Danny Brown - "Dance In The Water"
Danny Brown - "Really Doe" ft. Kendrick Lamar, Ab-Soul, * Earl Sweatshirt
Danny Brown - "Tell Me What I Don't Know"
Danny Brown - "White Lines"
Danny Brown - "When It Rain"
Dave & AJ Tracey - "Thiago Silva"
De La Soul - "Snoopies" feat. David Byrne
De La Soul - "Here in After" feat. Damon Albarn
Death Grips - "Eh"
Death Grips ft. Les Claypool - "More Than The Fairy"
Denzel Curry - "ULTIMATE"
Desiigner - "Panda"
Desiigner - "Timmy Turner"
DJ Drama - "Body For My Zip Code" ft. Freddie Gibbs, Dave East, Young Life
DJ Esco f/ Future & Lil Uzi Vert - Too Much Sauce
DJ Khaled ft. Drake - "For Free"
DJ Khaled - "Holy Key" - Big Sean, Kendrick Lamar & Betty Wright
DJ Khaled - "I Got the Keys" ft. Jay Z & Future
DJ Khaled - "Nas Album Done" ft. Nas
DJ Shadow - "Nobody Speak" Ft. Run The Jewels
Drake – "Child’s Play"
Drake - "Hype"
Drake - "Keep The Family Close"
Drake - "One Dance" (ft. WizKid and Kyla)
Drake – "Views"
Drake - "Summer Sixteen"
Drake - "Pop Style" feat. Kanye West & Jay-Z
D.R.A.M - "Broccoli" ft. Lil Yachty
D.R.A.M. - "Cash Machine"
Dumbfoundead - "Harambe"
Elzhi - "Hello!!!!!"
Emeli Sandé - "Garden"
Eminem - "Campaign Speech"
Fat Joe - "All the Way Up"
Fat Joe "All the Way Up" (Remix) ft. Jay Z
Frank Ocean - "Solo (Reprise)"
French Montana ft. Kodak Black "Lockjaw"
French Montana ft. Drake "No Shopping"
Flatbush Zombies - "Bounce"
Future - Used to This (feat. Drake)
Future - Wicked
gnash - "​i​ hate u, i love u"
Gucci Mane - "At Least a M"
Gucci Mane – "Last Time" (ft. Travi$ Scott)
Isaiah Rashad - "Free Lunch"
Isaiah Rashad - "Wats Wrong (feat. Kendrick Lamar & Zacari)"
Jasiri X "P.O.W.E.R." ft. Sa-Roc, Quadir Lateef, and Blak Rapp Madusa
James Blake - "Timeless ft. Vince Staples"
Jay Z - "spiritual"
Joe Budden - "By Law"
Joey Purp - "Winner's Circle"
Joey Purp - "Girls @" feat. Chance The Rapper
Ka - "I Wish (Death Poem)"
Kanye West - "30 Hours"
Kanye West - "Fade"
Kanye West - "Famous"
Kanye West - "Father Stretch My Hands, Pt. 1
Kanye West - "FML"
Kanye West - "No More Parties in LA"
Kanye West - "Pt. 2"
Kanye West - "Real Friends"
Kanye West- "Ultralight Beam"
Kanye West - "Waves"
Kanye West - "Wolves"
Kaytranada - "Glowed Up" (feat. Anderson .Paak)
Kaytranada - "Together" feat. AlunaGeorge & GoldLink
Kaytranada - "Drive Me Crazy" feat. Vic Mensa
Kemba - "The New Black Theory"
Kevin Gates  - 2 Phones
Kendrick Lamar - "untitled 02 | 06.23.2014."
Kendrick Lamar - "untitled 03 | 05.28.2013."
Kendrick Lamar - "untitled 07 | 2014-16"
Kool Keith - "Super Hero" ft. MF DOOM
Lecrae - Gangland (ft. Propaganda)
Lil Uzi Vert - Money Longer
Lil Yachty - 1 Night (Extended)
Lil Yachty - "Buzzin" ft. PARTYNEXTDOOR
Lloyd Banks - "Blood Sweat & Tears"
PARTYNEXTDOOR - "Come and See Me" feat. Drake
L'Orange & Mr.Lif - "A World Without Music"
Lupe Fiasco - "Pick Up The Phone"
Madeintyo - Uber Everywhere
Mac Miller - "Dang!" ft. Anderson .Paak
Mac Miller - "God is Fair, Sexy Nasty" (ft. Kendrick Lamar)
Machine Gun Kelly - "Bad Things" (ft. Camila Cabello)
Macklemore & Ryan Lewis - "Dance Off"
Mick Jenkins - "Daniels Bloom"
Mick Jenkins - "Spread Love"
Mister Wallace - "It Girl"
Noname - "Diddy Bop"
Nyck Caution - "The Pursuit"
OT Genesis f/ Young Dolph - Cut It!
P.O.S. - "Sleepdrone/Superposition"
Pusha T - "Drug Dealers Anonymous" ft. Jay Z
Rae Sremmurd (ft. Gucci Mane) - "Black Beatles"
Rae Sremmurd - "Set The Roof" feat. Lil Jon
Rich Chigga - Who That Be
Royce 5'9 - "Tabernacle"
Run The Jewels - "Talk To Me"
Schoolboy Q - "Dope Dealer"
Schoolboy Q - "Groovy Tony / Eddie Kane"
Schoolboy Q - "THat Part (Black Hippy Remix)"
Schoolboy Q - "THat Part"
Sir Spyro - "Topper Top" ft. Teddy Bruckshot, Lady Chann & Killa P
Snoop Dogg - "Super Crip"
Vic Mensa - "16 Shots"
Vic Mensa - "There's a Lot Going On"
Vince Staples - "Smile"
Vince Staples - "War Ready"
Vince Staples - "Pimp Hand"
The Avalanches - "Frankie Sinatra"
The Avalanches - "Noisy Eater"
The Game - "Hit The News"
The Game - "92 Bars"
The Game - "Bompton"
T.I. - "40 Acres" ft. B.Rossi & Killer Mike
Travis Scott ft. Kid Cudi - "Through The Late Night"
Travis Scott - "goosebumps"
Travi$ Scott – "Goosebumps" (ft. Kendrick Lamar)
YEAHTIM - "No More Staffin' On RG"
Yelawolf - "Daylight"
YG - "FDT" ft. Nipsey Hussle
YG - "Why You Always Hatin?" feat. Drake
Young Thug ft. Quavo - "Fuck Cancer"
Young Thug and Travis Scott -  "Pick Up The Phone"
Young Thug & Travi$ Scott – Yeah Yeah
Travi$ Scott – Pour Up
Wiz Khalifa ft. Travi$ Scott "Bake Sale"
Wretch 32 - "Open Conversation / Mark Duggan" ft. Varren Wade, Bobii Lewis & Avelino
Zack De La Rocha - "digging for windows"
Rock/CountryAgainst Me! - "333"
Baroness - "Shock Me"
Beach Slang - "Future Mixtape For The Art Kids"
Biffy Clyro - "Wolves of Winter"
Billy Talent - "Ghost Ship of Cannibal Rats"
Black Mountain - "Mothers of the Sun"
Bloc Party - "Different Drugs"
Bloc Party - "The Love Within"
Blink-182 - "Bored to Death"
Blink-182 - "Kings of the Weekend"
Bon Iver - "8 (circle)"
Bon Iver - "22 (OVER S∞∞N)"
Bon Iver- "21 M♢♢N WATER"
Bon Iver - "29 #Stafford APTS"
Bon Iver - "00000 Million"
Bon Iver - "715 - CR∑∑KS"
Bon Iver - "33 "GOD""
Brand New - "I Am A Nightmare"
Brian Fallon - "Smoke"
Brian Fallon - "Mojo Hand"
Brothers Osborne - "Stay A Little Longer"
Car Seat Headrest - "Fill In The Blank"
Car Seat Headrest - "Destroyed By Hippie Powers"
Car Seat Headrest - "(Joe Gets Kicked Out Of School For Doing) Drugs With Friends (But Says This Isn't A Problem)"
Car Seat Headrest - "The Ballad of the Costa Concordia"
Car Seat Headrest - "Vincent"
Daughter - "How"
David Bowie - "Blackstar"
David Bowie - "Dollar Days"
David Bowie - "Lazarus"
David Bowie - "Tis' A Pity She Was A Whore"
A Day To Remember - "Naivety"
Deftones - "Doomed User"
Deftones - "Gore"
Descendents - "On Paper"
Descendents - "Victim of Me"
Diarrhea Planet - "Life Pass"
The Dirty Nil - "Zombie Eyed"
Dr. Dog - "Bring My Baby Back"
Francis and the Lights - "Friends" feat. Bon Iver & Kanye West
Gojira - "Stranded"
Green Day - "Bang Bang"
Green Day - "Still Breathing"
Hamilton Leithauser & Rostam - "A 1000 Times"
Hamilton Leithauser & Rostam - "In A Black Out"
Hamilton Leithauser and Rostam - "The Bride's Dad"
Hinds - "Garden"
The Hotelier - "Settle the Scar"
Iggy Pop - "Gardenia"
Into It. Over It. - "Adult Contempt"
Jamie T - "Joan of Arc"
Jamie T - "Tinfoil Boy"
Leonard Cohen - "You Want It Darker"
Leonard Cohen - "On the Level"
Local Natives - "Fountains of Youth"
LUH - "Lament"
LVL UP - "Naked in the River with the Creator"
Margo Price - "Hands of Time"
The Menzingers - "Lookers"
Meshuggah - "Born in Dissonance"
Milk Teeth - "Swear Jar (again)"
Minor Victories - "For You Always"
Miranda Lambert - "Vice"
Mitski - "Your Best American Girl"
Modern Baseball - "Apple Cider, I Don't Mind"
Modern Baseball - "Breathing in Stereo"
Mumford & Sons - "There Will Be Time"
The Naked and Famous - "Higher"
Needtobreathe - Money & Fame
Nick Cave & The Bad Seeds - "I Need You"
Nick Cave & The Bad Seeds - "Jesus Alone"
Nick Cave & The Bad Seeds - "Skeleton Tree"
NOFX - Six Years on Dope
of Montreal - "It's Different For Girls"
Panic! At The Disco - "Death Of A Bachelor"
Parquet Courts - "Dust"
Parquet Courts - "Berlin Got Blurry"
Phantogram - "You Don't Get Me High Anymore"
Pierce The Veil - "Circles"
Pierce The Veil - "Texas Is Forever"
Pierce The Veil - "Phantom Power and Ludicrous Speed"
Pinegrove - "Old Cardinal"
PJ Harvey - "River Anacostia"
Primal Scream - "Carnival of Fools"
PUP - "Familiar Patterns"
PUP - "If This Tour Doesn't Kill You Then I Will"
PUP - "Can't Win"
Red Hot Chili Peppers - "The Getaway"
Red Hot Chili Peppers - "Dark Necessities"
Radiohead - "Burn the Witch"
Radiohead - "Daydreaming"
Radiohead - "Decks Dark"
Radiohead - "Identikit"
The Last Shadow Puppets - "Pattern"
The Strokes - "Drag Queen"
The Strokes - "Threat of Joy"
The Strokes - "OBLIVIUS"
Sturgill Simpson - "Sea Stories"
Sturgill Simpson - "In Bloom"
Taking Back Sunday - "Tidal Wave"
​twenty one pilots - "Heathens"
Weezer - "Jacked Up"
White Lung - "Below"
Whitney - "Golden Days"
Whitney - "No Woman"
Wilco - "Locator"
Wild Nothing - "Life of Pause"
Yelawolf - "Daylight"
Pop & R&BAlicia Keys - Holy War
Alicia Keys - Illusion of Bliss
Alicia Keys - Pawn It All
Anderson .Paak - "Am I Wrong" ft. Schoolboy Q
Anderson .Paak - "Come Down"
Anderson .Paak - "The Bird"
Animal Collective - "Floridada"
ANOHNI - "4 Degrees"
ANOHNI - "Drone Bomb Me"
ANOHNI - "Watch Me"
Ariana Grande - "Into You"
Ariana Grande - "Let Me Love You" ft. Lil Wayne
Arkells - "My Heart's Always Yours"
Arkells - "Private School"
Banks - "Trainwreck"
Beyoncé - "Don't Hurt Yourself"
Beyoncé - "Formation"
Beyoncé - "Freedom"
Beyoncé - "Hold Up"
Beyoncé - "Sorry"
Blood Orange - "Chance"
Carla Morrison - "Azucar Morena (Noyte Remix)"
Calvin Harris - "This Is What You Came For" (ft. Rihanna)
Cashmere Cat feat. The Weeknd & Francis and The Lights - "Wild Love"
Chairlift - "Ch-Ching"
Chairlift - "Polymorphing"
Christine and the Queens - "Paradis perdus"
Daughter - "Alone / With You"
Daya - "Cool"
DNCE - "Cake by the Ocean"
Drake ft Rihanna - "Too Good"
dvsn - "Too Deep"
Era Istrefi - Bonbon (Post Malone Remix)
Fifth Harmony - "All In My Head (Flex)" (ft. Fetty Wap)
Fifth Harmony - "That's My Girl"
Fifth Harmony - "Work From Home" (ft. Ty Dolla Sign)
Frank Ocean - "Higgs/Mitsubishi Sony"
Frank Ocean - "Nights"
Frank Ocean - "Nikes"
Frank Ocean - "Pink + White"
Frank Ocean - "Rushes To"
Frank Ocean - "Seigfried"
Frank Ocean - "Self Control"
Frank Ocean - "White Ferrari"
Frank Ocean - "Slide On Me"
Glass Animals - "The Other Side of Paradise"
Glass Animals - "Life Itself"
G.R.L. - "Kiss Myself"
HONNE - "Coastal Love"
HONNE - "Warm On A Cold Night"
HONNE & Izzy Bizu - "Someone That Loves You"
Little Mix - "Shout Out To My Ex"
Maggie Rogers - "Alaska"
PARTYNEXTDOOR - "Only U"
Pet Shop Boys - "Groovy"
Pet Shop Boys - "The Pop Kids"
PIKOTARO - "Pen Pineapple Apple Pen"
Rihanna - "Needed Me"
Rihanna - "Higher"
Rihanna - "Love on the Brain"
Rihanna - "Work" ft. Drake
Rihanna - "Consideration" ft. SZA
Sampha - "Blood On Me"
Sia - "Cheap Thrills"
Sia - "The Greatest"
Skye & Ross - "Light of Gold"
Skylar Grey - "Kill for You" (ft. Eminem)
Sofi Tukker - "Hey Lion"
Solange - "Cranes In the Sky"
Solange - "Mad"
Tegan and Sara - "Boyfriend"
Tegan and Sara - "Dying To Know"
Tegan and Sara - "Faint of Heart"
Terror Jr - "Come First"
The 1975 - "The Sound"
The 1975 - "Somebody Else"
The 1975 - "Love Me"
The Weeknd ft. Daft Punk - "Starboy"
Tkay Maizda - "Carry On" feat. Killer Mike
Tory Lanez - "LA Confidential"
Usher - "No Limit" ft. Young Thug
Electronic & ExperimentalCooking On Three Burners - This Girl
Dan Lissvik - "D"
Die Antwoord - "Banana Brain"
DJ Snake - "The Half" feat. Jeremih, Young Thug, & Swizz Beatz
Eric Prydz - "Black Dyce"
Flume - "Never Be Like You" ft. Kai
Flume - "Numb & Getting Colder" ft. KUČKA
Flume - "Say It" ft. Tove Lo
James Blake - "I Need A Forest Fire (ft. Bon Iver)"
James Blake - "f.o.r.e.v.e.r."
James Blake - "Love Me In Whatever Way"
Kaytranada - Glowed Up (feat. Anderson .Paak)
Kaytranada - "GOT IT GOOD (ft. Craig David)"
Kaytranada - "ONE TOO MANY"
M83 - "Do It, Try It"
Major Lazer - "Cold Water" feat. Mo & Justin Bieber
Miike Snow - "Ghengis Khan"
Miike Snow - "Heart Is Full (remix) ft. Run The Jewels"
Mike Perry - The Ocean ft. Shy Martin
Mura Masa - Love$ick ft. A$AP Rocky
The Album Leaf - "Glimmering Lights"
The Avalanches - "Subways"
The Chainsmokers - "All We Know" (ft. Pheobe Ryan)
The Chainsmokers - "Closer" ft. Halsey
The Chainsmokers - "Don't Let Me Down" ft. Daya
The Range - "Florida"
Snakehips - "Money on Me" - feat. Anderson .Paak
Woodkid - "Land of All"


I am a sinner who's probably gonna sin again
Lord, forgive me
Lord, forgive me
Things I don't understand
Sometimes I need to be alone
Bitch, don't kill my vibe
Bitch, don't kill my vibe
I can feel your energy from two planets away
I got my drink, I got my music
I would share it, but today I'm yelling


Bitch, don't kill my vibe
Bitch, don't kill my vibe
Bitch, don't kill my vibe
Bitch, don't kill my vibe


Look inside of my soul and you can find gold and maybe get rich
Look inside of your soul and you can find out it never exist
I can feel the changes
I can feel a new life, I always knew life can be dangerous
I can say that I like a challenge and you tell me it's painless
You don't know what pain is
How can I paint this picture
When the color blind is hangin' with you?
Fell on my face and awoke with a scar
Another mistake livin' deep in my heart
Wear it on top of my sleeve in a flick
I can admit that it did look like yours
Why you resent every making of his?
Tell me your purpose is petty again
But even a small lighter can burn a bridge
Even a small lighter can burn a bridge


I can feel the changes
I can feel the new people around me just want to be famous
You can see that my city found me
Then put me on stages, to me that's amazin'
To you that's a quick check
With all disrespect, let me say this


I am a sinner who's probably gonna sin again
Lord, forgive me
Lord, forgive me
Things I don't understand
Sometimes I need to be alone
Bitch, don't kill my vibe! Bitch, don't kill my vibe!
I can feel your energy from two planets away
I got my drink, I got my music
I would share it, but today I'm yelling


Bitch, don't kill my vibe
Bitch, don't kill my vibe
Bitch, don't kill my vibe
Bitch, don't kill my vibe


I'm tryin' to keep it alive
And not compromise the feeling we love
You're tryin' to keep it deprived
And only co-sign what radio does
And I'm lookin' right past you
We live in a world, we live in a world on two different axles
You live in a world, you livin' behind the mirror
I know what you scared of
The feeling of feeling emotions inferior
This shit is vital, I know you had to
This shit is vital, I know you had to
Die in a pitiful vain, tell me a watch and a chain
Is way more believable, give me a feasible gain
Rather a seasonal name
I'll let the people know this is somethin' you can blame
On yourselves, you can remain stuck in a box
I'ma break out and then hide every lock
I'ma break out and then hide every lock


I can feel the changes
I can feel the new people around me just want to be famous
You can see that my city found me, then put me on stages
To me, that's amazin'
To you that's a quick check
With all disrespect, let me say this


I am a sinner who's probably gonna sin again
Lord, forgive me
Lord, forgive me
Things I don't understand
Sometimes I need to be alone
Bitch, don't kill my vibe
Bitch, don't kill my vibe
I can feel your energy from two planets away
I got my drink, I got my music
I would share it, but today I'm yelling


Bitch, don't kill my vibe
Bitch, don't kill my vibe
Bitch, don't kill my vibe
Bitch, don't kill my vibe


Bitch, don't kill my vibe
You ain't heard the coast like this in a long time
Don't you see that long line?
And they waiting on Kendrick like the first and the fifteenth
Threes in the air, I can see you are in sync
Hide your feelings, hide your feelings, now, what you better do
I'll take your girlfriend and put that pussy on the pedestal


Bitch, don't kill my vibe
Bitch, don't kill my vibe
Walk out the door and they scream it's alive
My New Year's resolution is to stop all the pollution
Talk too motherfuckin' much, I got my drink, I got my music


I say bitch, don't kill my vibe
Bitch, don't kill my vibe
Bitch, don't kill my vibe
Bitch, don't kill my vibe




Ayy, K-Dot, get in the car, nigga!
Come on, we finna roll out!
Nigga, I got a pack of blacks and a beat CD
Get yo' freestyles ready!


So I'm saying, "What up? What up? Nigga, you made it"
So I'm saying, "What up? What up? Nigga, you made it"
So I'm saying, "What up? What up? Nigga, you made it"
So I'm saying, "What up? What up? Nigga, I hate it"
So I'm saying, "What up? What up? Nigga, I hate it"
Frustrated and I'm riding down them back streets
Making my conscience ask me
"Will I survive to make it up out this hole in time?"
Black boy fly, black boy fly
Black, black boy fly, black boy fly


I used to be jealous of Arron Afflalo
I used to be jealous of Arron Afflalo
He was the one to follow
He was the only leader foreseeing brighter tomorrows
He would live in the gym, we was living in sorrow
Total envy of him, he made his dream become a reality
Actually making it possible to swim
His way up outta Compton with further more to accomplish
Graduate with honors, a sponsor of basketball scholars
It's 2004 and I'm watching him score thirty
Remember vividly how them victory points had hurt me
'Cause every basket was a reaction or a reminder
That we was just moving backwards
The bungalow where you find us
The art of us ditching classes, heading nowhere fast
Stick my head inside the study hall, he focused on math
Determination ambition, plus dedication and wisdom
Qualities he was given was the shit we didn't have
Dug inside of his book bag and Coach Palmer asked for his finals
He had his back like a spinal, meanwhile
We singing the same old song spinning the vinyl
Eleven graders gone wrong
He focused on the NBA, we focused on some Patron
Now watch that black boy fly


Black boy fly, watch that black boy fly
Black boy fly, watch that black boy fly
Black boy fly, watch that black boy fly
Black boy


I used to be jealous of Jayceon
I used to be jealous of Jayceon Taylor when I was young
Taylor made a career out of music from writing songs
A Buick had driven past bumping him when I mowed the lawn
Money laundering hustling, homies pondering up against
Schemes to make a million even if doing you harm
War's the case and just in case you wasn't alarmed
The city had fought with firearms and many had died before dawn
It's 2004 and I'm hearing the people roar
For the name of The Game, they line in front of the store
Swap meets, selling our mixtapes, I'm like, "Oh shit, wait"
Don't wanna be another nigga stuck regretting mistakes
Mixed feelings was my opinion, I was defending my insecurities
Chillin' my conscience next to a villain
Compton made you believe success wasn't real
Be honest, none of us knew of a record deal
So as I peel through these lottery tickets
I see a Harley Davidson truck visit the same plaza we shopped
A tall nigga hopped out with Jordans and a white tank top
He was top of the rap game, we was the top of the block
So watch that black boy fly


Black boy fly, watch that black boy fly
Black boy fly, watch that black boy fly
Black boy fly, watch that black boy fly
Black boy


My mama didn't raise me up to be jealous-hearted
Like most of the winners call it
Regardless of where you stay, hold your head and continue marching
That's what she said, but in my head I wanted to be like Jordan
Award touring the country with money from mic recording
The only way out the ghetto, you know the stereotype
Shooting hoops or live on the stereo like Top 40
And shortly, I got discouraged
Like every time I walked to the corner, had them guns bursting
Nigga, I was rehearsing in repetition the phrase
That only one in a million will ever see better days
Especially when the crime waves was bigger than tsunamis
Break your boogie boards to pieces, you just a typical homie
All these niggas facetious and they all standing beside me
They all'll buy me a chopper if any one of you try me
What am I to do when every neighborhood is an obstacle?
When two niggas making it out had never sounded logical?
Three niggas making it out? That's mission impossible
So I never believed the type of performance that I could do
I wasn't jealous cause of the talents they got
I was terrified they'd be the last black boys to fly out of Compton
Thank God
(Black boy fly, watch that black boy fly)
Smoking out, pouring up, keep that lean up in my cup
All my car got leather and wood in my hood we call it buck
Everybody wanna ball, holla at broads at the mall
If he up, watch him fall, I can't fuck with y'all
(Pussy ass ho niggas) I can't fuck with y'all
(Bitches all up in my business) I can't fuck with y'all
(Industry of counterfeits) I can't fuck with y'all


Taking off when you landing
Bitch niggas gonna throw tantrums
And I'm dancing on them stars
The galaxy ain't got room for y'all
Ain't nothing gonna happen soon for y'all
While I'm here and every day I hear
Your bullshit, self-pity
Reason why you never dealt with me
Reason why your girl dealt with me
Hands up, in the building, we get busy and say


R.I.P. Aaliyah, R.I.P., yep
R.I.P. Aaliyah, R.I.P., yep
That's exactly what this sound like
A to the A to the L-I-Y-A-H, give it up 2 times
Then give it right back, don't blow my high


Smoking out, pouring up, keep that lean up in my cup
All my car got leather and wood in my hood we call it buck
Everybody wanna ball, holla at broads at the mall
If he up, watch him fall, I can't fuck with y'all
(Pussy ass ho niggas) I can't fuck with y'all
(Bitches all up in my business) I can't fuck with y'all
(Industry of counterfeits) I can't fuck with y'all


Look at my life then look at yours
Get some ambition, why you bored?
Time'll never wait on no man
Society will never hold your hand
Niggas like the gossip, like bitches
Got me thinking you don't like bitches
Wonder what's behind them Ray Bans
Eyes of a coward, I understand
Niggas like the gossip, like bitches
Sip Dom Pérignon, when we finish, we say


R.I.P. Aaliyah, R.I.P., yep
R.I.P. Aaliyah, R.I.P., yep
That's exactly what this sound like
But never will I ever forget Left Eye
Roll up, put a ribbon in the sky
And a button on your lips, don't blow my high


Smoking out, pouring up, keep that lean up in my cup
All my car got leather and wood in my hood we call it buck
Everybody wanna ball, holla at broads at the mall
If he up, watch him fall, I can't fuck with y'all
(Pussy ass ho niggas) I can't fuck with y'all
(Bitches all up in my business) I can't fuck with y'all
(Industry of counterfeits) I can't fuck with y'all


Now everybody sing this shit
I'm sending him a four-page letter
And I enclosed it with a kiss (a kiss)
And when I write him, he better
Get it on time
Look at my life, and look at yours
Get some ambition why you bored


R.I.P. Aaliyah, R.I.P
R.I.P. Aaliyah, R.I.P
R.I.P. Aaliyah, R.I.P
R.I.P. Aaliyah, R.I.P


For the record, I used to do a lot of humping when I was little
I got a lot of whoopings over that shit too, and that's random, but so what? Ha-ha


Gimme that beat fool, this a full time jack
No really this a Sounwave track
So really I ain't gotta steal nothing all I gotta do is kill it
When you press record button let the paralyzed feel it
I came back with a full time swag
And the critics thought they had me
Nah, I just bought more batteries
Turned up supercharged, a medium away from living large
Matter fact where my niggas at?
Where my bitches with them pretty weaves?
Enemies bleed on the maxi pad, pussy you fucked with the wrong one
I'm on one, I'll make sure your kids breathe pneumonia
Good kid, mad city evil in my heart
From the blood niggas fucking with me, crip niggas tryna kill me
Malcolm X mind state, if I raise the crime rate
It's a legitimate reason why
I put on repeat Kanye's "Touch the Sky"
But I'll be looking past that I'm tryna touch God
My heart to the heavens, the rebel of the reverend
Y'all married to the game well I'm 'bout to crash weddings
I put a lot of pain in the shit I write
If you going through something, this the shit you recite
This is bigger than life, this is Kendrick Lamar
This is Jimi Hendrix guitar on tour, bonjour, I mean war like that!
Yeah, straight like that


People don't be shy
Release them balloons to the sky
I need the world to celebrate me! (One time)
You'll never know when I'm gone (Two times)


In 2010, I'm tryna ball, nigga!
Like shooting jumpshots in the mall, nigga!
That's a quote from Ab-Soul
I suppose since you laugh that's the ultimate goal
On behalf of the Top Dawg conglomerate, shall stay anonymous
Searching seven continents accomplishing big shit
Big ass, big tits she on me
And just to get to me she'll fuck the homies... homie's homies
The life of a cool nigga, my nigga Tony said
"Just do you, nigga!" Show and prove, nigga
And they gon' play you for a fool that's for sure
'til they know you got the stinkiest stool, nigga!"
I ain't tripping I'm just tipping on fo-fo's
Back in the city and tipping on four hoes
That boy got a cold cold, he's sick con, slick on
Dropin red jewels like a school bar mitzvah, ooh
Straight like that


People don't be shy
Release them balloons to the sky
I need the world to celebrate me! (One time)
You'll never know when I'm gone (Two times)


Why y'all complain about OG's?
I don't look at a legend and say you owe me
Not Snoop, not Dre, not Ice Cube
I don't care me and Quik went to the same school
I look in the mirror and do it myself
Like a self made nigga, I don't need a maid, nigga
Do I need a co-sign from Dre or Jigga?
They can make me much bigger
But do I need 'em though?, I just need a flow
The type of shit that make you think you seen Pac ghost
"Me Against The World" on you mothafuckas
I got my back against the wall and a .45, dog get smoked, Chris Tucker
Uhh, tryna record my steelo
Even when I'm not there just like TiVo
The hoes tell me that I got a real big ego
And weed move slow right now but E go
You know what I'm talking 'bout? I look at your Audemars
To put ya'll in time out, it's time to unveil the real
And your career is about as frail as Ms. Winehouse
Just salute, grab a flute, and pull the wine out, ooh
Just like that


People don't be shy
Release them balloons to the sky
I need the world to celebrate me! (One time)
You'll never know when I'm gone (Two times)


Ridin' with them boys and girls and we're high
All we want to do is have a good time
Young, wild, and reckless is how we live life
Pray that we make it to twenty-one (One, one, one)
Oh, we make it to twenty-one (One, one, one)
Oh, ho ho ho, ho ho ho
Ridin' with them boys and girls and we're high
All we want to do is have a good time
Young, wild, and reckless is how we live life
Pray that we make it to twenty-one (One, one, one)
Oh, we make it to twenty-one (One, one, one)
Oh, ho ho ho, ho ho ho


I'm glad we were able to talk about her vice and her evils. There is an even more important topic I'd like to discuss: the dysfunctional bastards of the Ronald Reagan Era. Young men that learned to do everything spiteful. This is your generation. Live fast and die young. Who's willing to explain this story?


Ridin' with them boys and girls and we're high
All we want to do is have a good time
Young, wild, and reckless is how we live life
Pray that we make it to twenty-one (One, one, one)
Oh, we make it to twenty-one (One, one, one)
Oh, ho ho ho, ho ho ho
Ridin' with them boys and girls and we're high
All we want to do is have a good time
Young, wild, and reckless is how we live life
Pray that we make it to twenty-one...
In time you'll learn this is about you
In time you'll learn this is about you
In time you'll learn this is about you


Babies from 80's don't know—know no better
Don't nothing go better with ignorance
But the belligerent kids that we living with
Some of them masculine, some of them feminine
'member the universe used to be innocent
Now they just look at us crazy like immigrants
Everyday that I wake up, I'mma sin again
I'm not a citizen, I'm just a nigga from Section.80


Show of hands, how many been taking notes? Good. Leave everything on the table now. Vulnerability, this is your generation. Show, show your pain


Look at all the bullshit I been through
If I take you home, will you tell the truth?
Look at all the bullshit I been through
If I take you home, will you tell the truth?


Momma take this mothafuckin' block off
Tryna reach you every day, collect calls
Never get through, and I go through withdrawals
Say who told you that I wanted this door
To slam shut, I just wanted to vent or
Ask you if you give me your rent for
A attorney, I can pay you back more
Soon as I get out, yeah, every rack is yours
Commissary running low, I need help
Not too much, I hustle up the rest myself
K. Dot wrote me saying Marcus got killed
If you knew me, then you know how bad I feel
Quisha prove me wrong, and never came to visit
And I heard she fucking on some other nigga
And my niggas left me in the dark, blind
Mama just get back at me this last time


Men lie, wo—women lie
Men lie, wo—women
Men lie, wo—women lie
Men lie, wo—women
Look at all the bullshit I been through
If I take you home, will you tell the truth?


Mama, take this mothafuckin' block off
That's on the date the day I take the block off
Pulled up, and they put me in them cop cars
Please believe me, this ain't easy by far
You forgot you're talking to your only son
'Member when you put me in that relay run
I was racing, chasing dreams to be the best
You had taught me that the very day I won
All I need is you to give me same support
Investigation saying that the same report
From a witness just might testify in court
DA say I take a deal, or take a loss
I ain't built for all them goddamn numbers
God's will, say a prayer for me mama
If you can't, then open up the phone lines
Mama just get back at me this last time


Men lie, wo—women lie
Men lie, wo—women
Men lie, wo—women lie
Men lie, wo—women
Look at all the bullshit I been through
If I take you home, will you tell the truth?


Dante, if I stress to take the block off
That's the day the state had take them locks off
I could only help but do so much
Bettering yourself, your own crutch
Look at your reflection, tell me who you see
Who is your protection? G-O-D
No, it's not neglect-ion, I have just accepted
Your fate and what its gon' be
'Member all the nights that I cried
Thinkin' that my only son just died
Peeking through the window, kickin' through the door
It's you they looking for, raid outside
Rather see you locked up than dead
Only you would say that I'm selfish
So before I take the stand and put this bible in my hand
Son, let me say this


Men lie, wo—women lie
Men lie, wo—women
Men lie, wo—women lie
Men lie, wo—women
Look at all the bullshit I been through
If I take you home, will you tell the truth?


I'm with this


Complexion (two-step)
Complexion don't mean a thing (it's a Zulu love)
Complexion (two-step)
It all feels the same (it's a Zulu love)


Dark as the midnight hour or bright as the mornin' sun
Give a fuck about your complexion, I know what the Germans done
Sneak (dissin')
Sneak me through the back window, I’m a good field nigga
I made a flower for you outta cotton just to chill with you
You know I'd go the distance, you know I'm ten toes down
Even if master listenin', cover your ears, he 'bout to mention


Complexion (two-step)
Complexion don't mean a thing (it's a Zulu love)
Oh, Complexion (two-step)
It all feels the same (it's a Zulu love)


Dark as the midnight hour, or bright as the mornin' sun
Brown skinned, but your blue eyes tell me your mama can't run
Sneak (dissin')
Sneak me through the back window, I’m a good field nigga
I made a flower for you outta cotton just to chill with you
You know I'd go the distance, you know I'm ten toes down
Even if master's listenin', I got the world's attention
So I'ma say somethin' that's vital and critical for survival
Of mankind, if he lyin', color should never rival
Beauty is what you make it, I used to be so mistaken
By different shades of faces
Then Whit' told me, "A woman is woman, love the creation"
It all came from God, then you was my confirmation
I came to where you reside
And looked around to see more sights for sore eyes
Let the Willie Lynch theory reverse a million times with...


Complexion (two-step)
Complexion don't mean a thing (it's a Zulu love)
Oh, Complexion (two-step)
It all feels the same (it's a Zulu love)


You like it, I love it
You like it, I love it
You like it, I love it
You like it, I love it
You like it, I love it
You like it, I love it
You like it, I love it
You like it, I love it
(Where the homegirl Rapsody at?
I need you to speak your mind real quick, loved one!)


Let me talk my Stu Scott, ‘scuse me on my 2Pac
Keep your head up, when did you stop loving thy
Color of your skin? Color of your eyes
That’s the real blues, baby, like you met Jay’s baby
You blew me away, you think more beauty in blue, green and grey
All my solemn men up north, 12 years a slave
12 years of age, thinkin' my shade too dark
I love myself, I no longer need Cupid
Enforcin' my dark side like a young George Lucas
Light don’t mean you smart, bein' dark don’t make you stupid
And frame of mind for them bustas, ain’t talkin' “Woo-hah!”
Need a paradox for the pair of doc's they tutored
Like two Todd's, L-L, you lose two times
If you don’t see you beautiful in your complexion
It ain’t complex to put it in context
Find the air beneath the kite, that’s the context
Yeah, baby, I’m conscious, ain’t no contest
If you like it, I love it, all your earth tones been blessed
Ain’t no stress, jiggaboos wanna be
I ain’t talkin' Jay, I ain’t talkin' Bey
I’m talkin' days we got school watchin' movie screens
And spike your self-esteem
The new James Bond gon' be black as me
Black as brown, hazelnut, cinnamon, black tea
And it’s all beautiful to me
Call your brothers magnificent, call all the sisters queens
We all on the same team, blues and pirus, no colors ain’t a thing


Barefoot babies with no cares
Teenage gun toters that don’t play fair, should I get out the car?
I don’t see Compton, I see something much worse
The land of the landmines, the hell that’s on earth


Now everybody serenade the new faith of Kendrick Lamar
This is King Kendrick Lamar
King Kendrick and I meant it, my point intended is raw
Fix your lenses forensics would've told you Kendrick had killed it
Pretend it's a massacre and the masses upon us
And I mastered being the master at dodging your honor
And the chapter that read at 25 I would live dormant like five in the morning
They raid your spot while Kendrick's performing
And if they take everything, know I got


Compton, Compton, ain't no city quite like mine


Ay, Dre what's happening wit' it my nigga
Still I'm at it, peel the plastic off it, you can feel the magic
Still I'm laughing at the critics talking, I can see 'em gagging
When I'm back in the back of my city, back in the 'bach
With a batch of them banging Dre Beats with me, look where I'm at
It's the murder cap' and I'm captain at birthing this gangsta rap
It's a wrap when I'm done and I come a long way from a hundred dollars a month
To a hundred mil' in a day, bitch I'm from


Compton, Compton, ain't no city quite like mine


So come and visit the tire screeching, ambulance, policeman
Won't you spend a weekend on Rosecrans nigga
Khaki creasing, crime increasing on Rosecrans nigga
Kendrick Conan nigga
Where you sword at, hand on the cross and swore that
I do it big as Rasputia for them shooters
Kama Sutra scream fuck your position and make you hold that
I'm trying to stay grounded like four flats
But I know flats and Piru Crip tats


Will swarm on me like a beehive
Hop in the G ride
From the West to the East side
Know that's just how Compton roll


And that's a given
I pass the blunt then pass the torch of course that's my decision
I crash the Porsche then you report that you see me in Benzes
I must report that we import the narcotics you bought it
Then talked about it when crack hit the speakers, the music business
I blow up every time we throw up a record
Depending on what you expecting, I'm sure it's bigger than your religion
Perfected by niggas that manifested music to live in


Compton, Compton, ain't no city quite like mine


So tell that gangster throw his set high
Roll it up in a blunt, I'mma take you on the next high
I did exactly what I wanted that's what made them checks fly
In my direction, you never questioned when I said I
Would be a mogul before I visit 2Pac and Left-eye
Eazy and Aaliyah when I see you we gon' test drive
A Lambo in heaven but for now I'm on the redeye
Flying back to my city cuz I'll forever standby


Compton, Compton, ain't no city quite like mine


Now we can all celebrate
We can all harvest the rap artists of NWA
America target our rap market, as controversy and hate
Harsh realities we in made our music translate
To the coke dealers, the hood rich
And the broke niggas that play
With them gorillas that know killers
That know where you stay
Roll that kush, crack that case, ten bottles of rosé
This was brought to you by Dre
Now every motherfucker in here say:
"Look who's responsible
For taking Compton international
I make 'em holla"


Ayo Just Blaze, good looking homie
Just Blaze
Ain't no city quite like mine, yeah
In the city of Compton
Ain't no city quite like mine


Mom, I finna use the van real quick!
Be back, 15 minutes!


Greeting boys and girls (Greetings boys and girls)
My name is Petey P (My name is Petey P)
Kendrick's childhood imaginary friend (That’s right, that's right, that's right)
I am your neighbor (I am your neighbor)
And I’d like to welcome you to good kid, m.A.A.d city (good kid, m.A.A.d city)
So grab your cartoons and cereal (And sing)
Your pop guns and fireworks (And sing)
And sing along (Along)


When we grow up we gon go and get us a million
Spend it all in front of the county building
Blow it like Coltrane, blow it like Coltrane, yeah
Sing along kids, sing along
When we grow up we gon go and get us a million
Spend it all in front of the county building
Blow it like Coltrane, blow it like Coltrane, yeah


Kendrick, you remember that one time when we was...
I’ve been waiting on this day since Dr. Dre and Pac
Was on Rosecrans in that burger stand at '95
People staring at 'em in amazement
Reservations at the Days Inn
We was living out a hotel at the time
Breakfast, lunch and dinner, chicken from Kentucky Fried
Mama babysitting Section 8 vouchers the move
When nothing else to lose but a burger flipping job
Close my eyes inside the swap meet and imagine it's a mansion
Gold ballroom, AK-47 dancin'
Howling at the moon, what’s a pack of hungry babies?
Hope you feed us soon, bite your back, you die of rabies
Everyday we pray to eat at the table at Sizzlers
But never make the visit, if better days was on its way
Then they make the decision, to make the wrong turn
So for now we heat this skillet so this canned food can burn
Oh yeah, I remember that, it- it was the ravioli with the hot sauce in it, right?


When we grow up we gon go and get us a million
Am I right?
Spend it all in front of the county building
Oh!
Blow it like Coltrane, blow it like Coltrane, yeah
Don't forget to sing along by the way, sing along
When we grow up we gon go and get us a million
Spend it all in front of the county building
Blow it like Coltrane, blow it like Coltrane, yeah


And all the ghetto children in the world say, “that’s my car” (Aye, oh)
All the ghetto boys say, “that’s my car” (Aye, oh)
All the ghetto girls say, “that’s my car” (Aye, oh)
When we grow up, when we grow up (Aye, oh)
Ghetto children in the world say, “that’s my car” (Aye, oh)
All the ghetto boys say, “that’s my car” (Aye, oh)
All the ghetto girls say, “that’s my car” (Aye, oh)
When we grow up, when we grow up (Aye, oh)


Nigga you remember the smoke and the burning buildings and shit?
Couple stolen T.V.'s and a seat belt for my safety (Uh-huh)
Played the passenger I think it’s five years after eighty (Yeah, yeah that)
Seven, do the math, ‘92, don’t you be lazy (I won't)
Looking out the window, notice all the essentials
Of a block party that stop for a second, then it rekindle
Like a flame from a trick candle, everybody got dental
Insurance ‘cause we ‘bout to floss, you get that couch I sent you?
I heard that from a block away, probably had credentials
Of a scholar but, shit, not today, them Dayton Spokes was his to take
Refrigerators, barbecue pits, and Jordan kicks
They did invasions while helicopters recorded it
Hello Mi-Mister Miyagi, I want them Kenwood woofers
Say that you got me, if not, I’ll dig in your drawer for it
The swap meet was the bulls' eye like Tauruses
Murder was the melody you should know what the chorus is
"Papa, you really telling me we can just get some more of it
If we run out?" He said, "Lil' nigga, today the poor is rich
Don’t tell your mom that you seen a Molotov bomb
If she ask just know you have to lie and son don’t forget
Bitches ain’t shit, hoes ain’t neither
Niggas gon' snitch, watch the company you keeping
And one day you’ll put money in the ghetto when you got it
Rather than having to hustle off these Rodney King riots"
That- that’s right the mothafuckin’ Rodney King...
You was with your daddy on Bullis Road


When we grow up we gon go and get us a million
That's crazy
Spend it all in front of the county building
Blow it like Coltrane, blow it like Coltrane
Don't forget, still sing along kids, still sing along
When we grow up we gon go and get us a million
Please sing
Spend it all in front of the county building
Blow it like Coltrane, blow it like Coltrane


Ali, you thirsty on Twitter!
You boo-boo, you T'd
You turned down, you thirsty
You boo-boo!


Uh, I'm tryna learn something new
I'm tryna find myself, I'm searching deep for Kendrick Lamar
I read about Napoleon Hill and try to know God
They say he the key to my blessings, and if I speak the good
Into existence, that instant my dreams will unlock
Money flow like water, I'll just wait at the dock
And by the way I'ma start, finding more light to shed
Like a small garage in your backyard
I'm back chilling with a friend of mine, she mighty fine
But I notice that her heart resides next to bitterness
Always hollering who she don't like and who she kick it with
Who she wanna fight, who wearing a weave
Who Dooney and Bourke bag is fake, who holding the keys
To the car she drove last year or who fucking on who
And who need a pap smear, getting on my nerves
But before your negative energy curve, bitch I'ma cut you off


'Cause every time you come around
You be hollering that whoop-de-whoop, blah-zay-blah
He say, she say, oh my God
Shut the fuck up... hoe
Every time you come around
You be hollering that whoop-de-whoop, blah-zay-blah
He say, she say...


Uh, I'm tryna learn something new
I'm tryna surround myself with people that inspire me
Or at least inquire similar desires
To do what it T-A-K-E just to reach the T-O-P
I'm talking ideas, motivation
It's more than making, enemies, my nigga
Oh, that's not ya memo? Then tell me why you constant stressing
On how you well connected like centipedes, my nigga
I function with you and you flaunt your pistol
Every second tell me how you pressed 'em at the Monte Cristo
Where so and so from, and what neighborhoods beefing
Who baby momma's a rat, and who got killed last weekend
That shit is mad depressing, bringing me down
Speak on somethin' with some substance that can get us both paid
Rather than telling me how these niggas jocking your style
Or his rims ain't bigger, pussy nigga, I'ma cut you off


'Cause every time you come around
You be hollering that whoop-de-whoop, blah-zay-blah
He say, she say, oh my God
Shut the fuck up... scary ass
Every time you come around
You be hollering that whoop-de-whoop, blah-zay-blah
He say, she say


Uh, I'm tryna learn something new
I'm tryna better my chances of becoming a star
I'm tryna feel the vibe of Mona Lisa
Studying art... now paint that picture
Life behind bars, remember the very day I got caught?
I murdered a rapper, and you filed the police report?
See what I was taught, family is all I need
But indeed them too can run me right up a tree
Constantly talking shit 'bout the next relative
Wanting me to take sides, but I'd never give in
Ever since grandma died, everyone parted ways
Argue on holidays, left my uncle in prison
For 15 years, no one paid him attention but moms
Yeah, my momma as loyal as any sister would come
Come to my house just to yap about your own people
Dang, and if your blood wasn't running through my veins
I would prolly cut y'all off too, yep


'Cause everytime y'all come around
Y'all be hollering that whoop-de-whoop, blah-zay-blah
He say, she say, oh my God, shut the fuck up
Keep it running, Ali
Every time you come around
You be hollering that whoop-de-whoop, blah-zay-blah
He say, she say


So tell 'em, "Shut the fuck up!"
Tell 'em, "Shut the fuck up!"
Yeah, bitch, you boo-boo, you T'd
You turnt down, you thirsty
Tell 'em "Shut the fuck up!"
Tell 'em "Shut the fuck up!"
Yeah, nigga, you boo-boo, you T'd
You turnt down, you thirsty
You thirsty, you boo-boo
You T, you turnt down
You boo-boo, you T'd
You boo-boo, you turnt down
You thirsty, you T'd
You boo-boo, you turnt down
You boo-boo, you T'd
You turnt down, you weak
You weak, yo’ bitch weak
Yo- (laughs)
You boo-boo, you T (laughs)
Keep all that


What is HiiiPoWeR?
HiiiPoWeR is the way we think, the way we live
See it’s known today that the human race is nothing
No morals, no standards
What we’re about to do is raise the level of expectations
No, you don’t have to have a lot of money
You don’t have to be rich
But you will be rich in mind and spirit
Some say it’s as big as a crew, some say it’s as big as a gang
HiiiPoWeR, we stand for it as if it’s as big as a religion
I got, I got, I got, I got—
Loyalty, got royalty inside my DNA
Cocaine quarter piece, got war and peace inside my DNA
I got power, poison, pain and joy inside my DNA
I got hustle though, ambition flow inside my DNA
I was born like this, since one like this, immaculate conception
I transform like this, perform like this, was Yeshua new weapon
I don't contemplate, I meditate, then off your fucking head
This that put-the-kids-to-bed
This that I got, I got, I got, I got—
Realness, I just kill shit ’cause it's in my DNA
I got millions, I got riches buildin' in my DNA
I got dark, I got evil, that rot inside my DNA
I got off, I got troublesome heart inside my DNA
I just win again, then win again like Wimbledon, I serve
Yeah, that’s him again, the sound that engine in is like a bird
You see fireworks and Corvette tire skrrt the boulevard
I know how you work, I know just who you are
See, you's a, you's a, you's a—
Bitch, your hormones prolly switch inside your DNA
Problem is, all that sucker shit inside your DNA
Daddy prolly snitched, heritage inside your DNA
Backbone don't exist, born outside a jellyfish, I gauge
See, my pedigree most definitely don't tolerate the front
Shit I've been through prolly offend you, this is Paula's oldest son
I know murder, conviction
Burners, boosters, burglars, ballers, dead, redemption
Scholars, fathers dead with kids and
I wish I was fed forgiveness
Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, soldier’s DNA (I’m a soldier's DNA)
Born inside the beast, my expertise checked out in second grade
When I was 9, on cell, motel, we didn’t have nowhere to stay
At 29, I've done so well, hit cartwheel in my estate
And I'm gon' shine like I’m supposed to, antisocial extrovert
And excellent mean the extra work
And absentness what the fuck you heard
And pessimists never struck my nerve
And Nazareth gonna plead his case
The reason my power's here on earth
Salute the truth, when the prophet say


I-I got loyalty, got royalty inside my DNA
This is why I say that hip hop has done more damage to young African Americans than racism in recent years
I got loyalty, got royalty inside my DNA
I live a better life, I'm rollin' several dice, fuck your life
I got loyalty, got royalty inside my DNA
I live a be-, fuck your life
5, 4, 3, 2, 1
This is my heritage, all I'm inheritin'
Money and power, the mecca of marriages


Tell me somethin'
You mothafuckas can't tell me nothin'
I'd rather die than to listen to you
My DNA not for imitation
Your DNA an abomination
This how it is when you in the Matrix
Dodgin' bullets, reapin' what you sow
And stackin' up the footage, livin' on the go
And sleepin' in a villa
Sippin' from a Grammy, walkin' in the buildin'
Diamond in the ceilin', marble on the floors
Beach inside the window, peekin' out the window
Baby in the pool, godfather goals
Only Lord knows I've been goin' hammer
Dodgin' paparazzi, freakin' through the cameras
Eat at Four Daughters, Brock wearin' sandals
Yoga on a Monday, stretchin' to Nirvana
Watchin' all the snakes, curvin' all the fakes
Phone never on, I don't conversate
I don't compromise, I just penetrate
Sex, money, murder—these are the breaks
These are the times, level number 9
Look up in the sky, 10 is on the way
Sentence on the way, killings on the way
Motherfucker, I got winners on the way
You ain't shit without a body on your belt
You ain't shit without a ticket on your plate
You ain't sick enough to pull it on yourself
You ain't rich enough to hit the lot and skate
Tell me when destruction gonna be my fate
Gonna be your fate, gonna be our faith
Peace to the world, let it rotate
Sex, money, murder—our DNA


It was always me vs the world
Until I found it's me vs me
Why, why, why, why?
Why, why, why, why?
Just remember, what happens on Earth stays on Earth!
We gon' put it in reverse


Darling, I told you many times
And I am telling you once again
Just to remind you, sweetheart
That my—


Oh, Lamar
Hail Mary and marijuana, times is hard
Pray with the hooligans, shadows all in the dark
Fellowship with demons and relatives, I'm a star
Life is one funny mothafucka
A true comedian, you gotta love him, you gotta trust him
I might be buggin', infomercials and no sleep
Introverted by my thoughts; children, listen, it gets deep
See, once upon a time inside the Nickerson Garden projects
The object was to process and digest poverty's dialect
Adaptation inevitable: gun violence, crack spot
Federal policies raid buildings and drug professionals
Anthony was the oldest of seven
Well-respected, calm and collected
Laughin' and jokin' made life easier; hard times, mama on crack
A four-year-old tellin' his nanny he needed her
His family history: pimpin' and bangin'
He was meant to be dangerous
Clocked him a grip and start slangin'
Fifteen, scrapin' up his jeans with quarter pieces
Even got some head from a smoker last weekend
Dodged a policeman, workin' for his big homie
Small-time hustler, graduated to a brick on him
10,000 dollars out of a project housing, that's on the daily
Seen his first mil twenty years old, had a couple of babies
Had a couple of shooters
Caught a murder case, fingerprints on the gun they assumin'
But witnesses couldn't prove it
That was back when he turned his back and they killed his cousin
He beat the case and went back to hustlin'
Bird-shufflin', Anthony rang
The first in the projects with the two-tone Mustang
That 5.0 thing, they say 5-0 came
Circlin' parking lots and parking spots
And hoppin' out while harrassin' the corner blocks
Crooked cops told Anthony he should kick it
He brushed 'em off and walked back to the Kentucky Fried Chicken
See, at this chicken spot
There was a light-skinned nigga that talked a lot
With a curly top and a gap in his teeth
He worked the window, his name was Ducky
He came from the streets, the Robert Taylor Homes
Southside Projects, Chiraq, the Terror Dome
Drove to California with a woman on him and 500 dollars
They had a son, hopin' that he'd see college
Hustlin' on the side with a nine-to-five to freak it
Cadillac Seville, he'd ride his son around on weekends
Three-piece special with his name on the shirt pocket
'Cross the street from the projects, Anthony planned to rob it
Stuck up the place before, back in '84
That's when affiliation was really at gears of war
So many relatives tellin' us, sellin' us devilish works
Killin' us, crime, intelligent, felonious
Prevalent proposition with 9's
Ducky was well-aware
They robbed the manager and shot a customer last year
He figured he'd get on these niggas' good sides
Free chicken every time Anthony posted in line
Two extra biscuits, Anthony liked him and then let him slide
They didn't kill him; in fact, it look like they're the last to survive
Pay attention, that one decision changed both of they lives
One curse at a time
Reverse the manifest and good karma, and I'll tell you why
You take two strangers and put 'em in random predicaments
Give 'em a soul so they can make their own choices and live with it
Twenty years later, them same strangers, you make 'em meet again
Inside recording studios where they reapin' their benefits
Then you start remindin' them about that chicken incident
Whoever thought the greatest rapper would be from coincidence?
Because if Anthony killed Ducky, Top Dawg could be servin' life
While I grew up without a father and die in a gunfight



Thgifnug a ni eid dna rehtaf a tuohtiw pu werg I elihW
Efil 'nivres eb dluoc gwaD poT ,ykcuD dellik ynohtnA fi esuaceB
Ecnedicnioc morf eb dluow reppar tsetaerg eht thguoht reveohW?
Tnedicni nekcihc taht tuoba meht 'nidnimer trats uoy nehT
Stifeneb rieht 'nipaer yeht erehw soiduts gnidrocer edisnI
Niaga teem me' ekam uoy ,sregnarts emas meht ,retal sraey ytnewT
Ti htiw evil dna seciohc nwo rieht ekam nac yeht os luos a me' eviG
Stnemaciderp modnar ni me' tup dna sregnarts owt ekat uoY
Yhw uoy llet ll'I dna ,amrak doog dna tsefinam eht esreveR
Emit a ta esruc enO
Sevil yeht fo htob degnahc noisiced eno taht ,noitnetta yaP
Erac tuB
—Tpecnoc etalucammi ,siht ekil eno ecnis retrauq eniacoC
AND ym edisni ytlayor tog ,ytlayoL
—Tog I ,tog I ,tog I ,tog I
So, I was takin' a walk the other day…
I want to describe my discovery in the simplest terms possible
Because it will reveal to you why it is true
That’s whatever the mind can deceive and believe
The mind can achieve
Regardless of how many times you may have failed in the past
Or off day your aims and hopes may be


Go getter, with no cheddar
Just a white tee and a swap meet sweater
My life is likely to see great endeavors
But I can't win if I can't get it together
What I gotta do in order to see success?
Having the world's best to call me the best?
Pull up at the Grammy awards as the best dressed
With an address linked to a beautiful actress?
A dollar and a dream, I feel J. Cole
Word to the hole in my pocket and the hoes
That don't wanna fuck with a broke nigga with ambition
But the last time I checked, y'all was broke bitches
Make a name for myself then bubble like the ass of Buffy
When she wearing a tight belt
The homies on the block can say whatever they say
I don't wanna be a killer, I wanna be a Gates


In time, it'll come
Just stay focused and humble, my son
Show and prove, prove you're the one
It's not about who is dopest
Who wants it the most
So just go out and get it
Go out and get it
Go out and get it
Go out and get it


What I gotta do in order to see success?
Having the world's best to call me the best
Pull up at the Grammy awards as best dressed
With an address next to a beautiful actress
Do I gotta run in your spot and start blastin'
Better yet, rob the nearest Nix Check Cashing
Ear hustle on a nigga that's constantly braggin'
Catch him at the light, snatch him out his Jeep wagon
Or maybe I gotta hook up with Jose
Cop 5 bricks of the yay, head to the Bay
Area or carry the birds to VA
Let the Clipse distribute the work all day
Then come back home
Every three weeks flip three to six zones
Homies on the block can say whatever they want
I don't wanna be a dealer, I wanna be a trump
Donald that is


In time, it'll come
Just stay focused and humble, my son
Show and prove, prove you're the one
It's not about who is dopest
Who wants it the most
So just go out and get it
(And when I do I do it again
Then I go back
When I do I do it again
Then I go back
Thug it out)
Go out and get it
(But for now I'mma go head and doug it out
I gotta rhyme, rhyme)
Go out and get it
Go out and get it


So welcome to the story of my life
See I'm tryna get to get right off the shit that I write
Make a fortune, buy some Porsches for my momma and my wife
Pops engine in this old school run tiiight!
But as you listening to K-D-O-T
Man, me and my girl split the bucket of KFC
She listening to Drake and all I can say is "Damn
These niggas that much better than me, baby?"
I don't think this is meant to be
Cause I'm always losing self esteem
She paused the iPhone then said, "Huh?"
I repeated what I said then she replied, "Shut up."
You know you the best boy, you gotta keep doing it
But don't forget when you do, just keep you in it
And never listen to what the industry say
Don't be a typical artist, be more like Jay
Russell, Barry Gordy, Quincy Jones, Bob Johnson, Sean Combs, L.A. Reid
Young black entrepreneurs did what it took to succeed, yeah
So I gotta see success, I gotta make it off them Rosecrans steps
Rising to the top like a soda shook up
Bout to pop, and I'll pop on whoever's in my way



Go out and get it
Go out and get it
New Kung Fu Kenny
Ain't nobody prayin' for me
Y'all know, what happens on Earth stays on Earth
Here we go!
I don't give a fuck, I don't give a fuck
I don't give a, I don't give a, I don't give a fuck


I'm willin' to die for this shit
I done cried for this shit, might take a life for this shit
Put the Bible down and go eye for an eye for this shit
D-O-T my enemy, won't catch a vibe for this shit, ayy
I been stomped out in front of my mama
My daddy commissary made it to commas
Bitch, all my grandmas dead
So ain't nobody prayin' for me, I'm on your head, ayy
Thirty millions later, know the feds watchin'
Auntie on my Telegram like, "Be cautious!"
I be hangin' out at Tam's, I be on Stockton
I don't do it for the 'Gram, I do it for Compton
I'm willin' to die for this shit, nigga
I'll take your fuckin' life for this shit, nigga
We ain't goin' back to broke, family sellin' dope
That's why you maney-ass rap niggas better know


If I gotta slap a pussy-ass nigga, I'ma make it look sexy
If I gotta go hard on a bitch, I'ma make it look sexy
I pull up, hop out, air out, made it look sexy
They won't take me out my element
Nah, take me out my element


I'm allergic to a bitch nigga, ayy
An imaginary rich nigga, ayy
Seven figures ho, that's slimmer than my bitch figure, ayy
Goin' digital and physical on all y'all, ayy
Bunch of criminals and money in my phone calls, ayy
We okay, we let the A1 fly
Relocate, jump on the same G5
Checkin' for me heavy 'cause I go, yeah, I go, yeah
They never been ready, yeah, I know, yeah, know, yeah
100K spread across the floor, 'cross the floor, yeah
None of y'all fuckin' with the flow, yeah, the flow, yeah
Years in the makin', and don't y'all mistake it
I got 'em by a landslide, we talkin' about races
You know this'll never be a tie, just look at they laces
You know careers take off, just gotta be patient
Mr. One through Five, that's the only logic
Fake my death, go to Cuba, that's the only option


If I gotta slap a pussy-ass nigga, I'ma make it look sexy
If I gotta go hard on a bitch, I'ma make it look sexy
I pull up, hop out, air out, made it look sexy
They won't take me out my element
Nah, take me out my element


Damned if I do, if I don't (Yuh)
Goddamn us all if you won't (Yuh)
Damn, damn, damn, it's a goddamn shame
You ain't front in line, get out the goddamn way


Niggas thought they wasn't gonna see me, huh?
Niggas thought that K-Dot real life
Was the same life they see on TV, huh?
Niggas wanna flex on me and be in L.A. for free, huh?
Next time they hit the 10 freeway, we need a receipt, huh?
'Cause most of y'all ain't real, most of y'all gon' squeal
Most of y'all just envy, but jealousy get you killed
Most of y'all throw rocks and try to hide your hand
Just say his name and I promise that you'll see Candyman
Because it's all in your eyes, most of y'all tell lies
Most of y'all don't fade, most of y'all been advised
Last LP I tried to lift the black artists
But it's a difference 'tween black artists and wack artists


If I gotta slap a pussy-ass nigga, I'ma make it look sexy
It's the one and only, the world's greatest, the Kid Capri
If I gotta go hard on a bitch, I'ma make it look sexy
I pull up, hop out, air out, made it look sexy
They won't take me out my element
Nah, take me out my element
Poverty's paradise
I don’t think I could find a way to make it on this earth
(I've been hungry all my life)


What's up, family?
Yeah, it’s your cousin Carl, man, just givin' you a call, man
I know you been havin' a lot on yo' mind lately
And I know you feel like, you know
People ain't been prayin' for you
But you have to understand this, man, that we are a cursed people Deuteronomy 28:28 says, "The Lord shall smite thee with madness And blindness, and astonishment of heart"
See, family, that's why you feel like you feel
Like you got a chip on your shoulder
Until you follow His commandments, you gonna feel that way...


Why God, why God do I gotta suffer?
Pain in my heart carry burdens full of struggle
Why God, why God do I gotta bleed?
Every stone thrown at you restin' at my feet
Why God, why God do I gotta suffer?
Earth is no more, won’t you burn this muh’fucka?
I don't think I could find a way to make it on this earth
Akcuf’hum siht nrub uoy t'now ,erom on si htraE
Reffus attog I od doG yhw ,doG yhW
Teef ym ta 'nitser uoy ta nworht enots yrevE
Deelb attog I od doG yhw ,doG yhW
Elggurts fo lluf snedrub yrrac traeh ym ni niaP
Reffus attog I od doG yhw ,doG yhW
Teef ym ta 'nitser uoy ta nworht enots yrevE


I beat yo’ ass, keep talkin' back
I beat yo' ass, who bought you that?
You stole it, I beat yo' ass if you say that game is broken
I beat yo' ass if you jump on my couch
I beat yo' ass if you walk in this house
With tears in your eyes, runnin' from Poo Poo and Prentice
Go back outside, I beat yo' ass, lil' nigga
That homework better be finished, I beat yo' ass
Your teachers better not be bitchin' 'bout you in class
That pizza better not be wasted, you eat it all
That TV better not be loud if you got it on
Them Jordans better not get dirty when I just bought 'em
Better not hear 'bout you humpin' on Keisha's daughter
Better not hear you got caught up
I beat yo' ass, you better not run to your father
I beat yo' ass, you know my patience runnin' thin
I got buku payments to make
County building's on my ass, tryna take my food stamps away
I beat yo' ass if you tell them social workers he live here
I beat yo' ass if I beat yo' ass twice and you still here
Seven years old, think you run this house by yourself?
Nigga, you gon' fear me if you don't fear no one else


If I could smoke fear away, I'd roll that mothafucker up
And then I'd take two puffs
I'm high now (Huh), I'm high now (Huh)
I'm high now (Huh), I'm high now (Huh)
Life's a bitch, pull them panties to the side now
(Pull them panties to the side now)
I don't think I could find a way to make it on this earth


I'll prolly die anonymous, I'll prolly die with promises
I'll prolly die walkin' back home from the candy house
I'll prolly die because these colors are standin' out
I'll prolly die because I ain't know Demarcus was snitchin'
I'll prolly die at these house parties, fuckin' with bitches
I'll prolly die from witnesses leavin' me falsed accused
I'll prolly die from thinkin' that me and your hood was cool
Or maybe die from pressin' the line, actin' too extra
Or maybe die because these smokers are more than desperate
I'll prolly die from one of these bats and blue badges
Body-slammed on black and white paint, my bones snappin'
Or maybe die from panic or die from bein' too lax
Or die from waitin' on it, die 'cause I'm movin' too fast
I'll prolly die tryna buy weed at the apartments
I'll prolly die tryna defuse two homies arguin'
I'll prolly die 'cause that's what you do when you're 17
All worries in a hurry, I wish I controlled things


If I could smoke fear away, I'd roll that mothafucker up
And then I'd take two puffs
(I've been hungry all my life)
I'm high now (Huh), I'm high now (Huh)
I'm high now (Huh), I'm high now (Huh)
Life's a bitch, pull them panties to the side now
(Pull them panties to the side now)
Now


When I was 27, I grew accustomed to more fear
Accumulated 10 times over throughout the years
My newfound life made all of me magnified
How many accolades do I need to block denial?
The shock value of my success put bolts in me
All this money, is God playin' a joke on me?
Is it for the moment, and will he see me as Job?
Take it from me and leave me worse than I was before?
At 27, my biggest fear was losin' it all
Scared to spend money, had me sleepin' from hall to hall
Scared to go back to Section 8 with my mama stressin'
30 shows a month and I still won't buy me no Lexus
What is an advisor? Somebody that's holdin' my checks
Just to fuck me over and put my finances in debt?
I read a case about Rihanna's accountant and wondered
How did the Bad Girl feel when she looked at them numbers?
The type of shit'll make me flip out and just kill somethin'
Drill somethin', get ill and fill ratchets with a lil' somethin'
I practiced runnin' from fear, guess I had some good luck
At 27 years old, my biggest fear was bein' judged
How they look at me reflect on myself, my family, my city
What they say 'bout me reveal if my reputation would miss me
What they see from me would trickle down generations in time
What they hear from me would make 'em highlight my simplest lines


I'm talkin' fear, fear of losin' creativity
I'm talkin' fear, fear of missin' out on you and me
I'm talkin' fear, fear of losin' loyalty from pride
'Cause my DNA won't let me involve in the light of God
I'm talkin' fear, fear that my humbleness is gone
I'm talkin' fear, fear that love ain't livin' here no more
I'm talkin' fear, fear that it's wickedness or weakness
Fear, whatever it is, both is distinctive
Fear, what happens on Earth stays on Earth
And I can't take these feelings with me, so hopefully, they disperse
Within fourteen tracks, carried out over wax
Searchin' for resolutions until somebody get back
Fear, what happens on Earth stays on Earth
And I can't take these feelings with me, so hopefully they disperse
Within fourteen tracks, carried out over wax
Wonderin' if I'm livin' through fear or livin' through rap
Damn


God damn you, God damn me
God damn us, God damn we
God damn us all


Verse 2 says, "You only have I known of all the families of the Earth, therefore I will punish you for all your iniquities."
So until we come back to these commandments
Until you come back to these commandments
We gonna feel this way, we gonna be under this curse
Because He said He's gonna punish us
The so-called Blacks, Hispanics, and Native American Indians
Are the true children of Israel
We are the Israelites, according to the Bible
The children of Israel
He's gonna punish us for our iniquities, for our disobedience
Because we chose to follow other gods
That man chastens his son, so the Lord, thy God, chasten thee
So, just like you chasten your own son, He's gonna chasten you
Because He loves you, so that's why we get chastised
That's why we're in the position that we're in
Until we come back to these laws, statutes, and commandments
And do what the Lord says, these curses is gonna be upon us
We gonna be at a lower state in this life that we live
Here, in today, in the United States of America
I love you, family, and I pray for you
God bless you
Shalom
Ain't nobody prayin' for me
(Ain't nobody prayin' for me)
(Ain't nobody prayin' for me)
Ain't nobody prayin' for me
(Nobody prayin' for me)
Ain't nobody prayin' for me
(Ain't nobody prayin' for me)
(Nobody prayin' for me)


I feel like a chip on my shoulders
I feel like I'm losin' my focus
I feel like I'm losin' my patience
I feel like my thoughts in the basement
Feel like, I feel like you're miseducated
Feel like I don't wanna be bothered
I feel like you may be the problem
I feel like it ain't no tomorrow, fuck the world
The world is endin', I'm done pretendin'
And fuck you if you get offended
I feel like friends been overrated
I feel like the family been fakin'
I feel like the feelings are changin'
Feel like my thought of compromise is jaded
Feel like you wanna scrutinize how I made it
Feel like I ain't feelin' you all
Feel like removin' myself, no feelings involved
I feel for you, I've been in the field for you
It's real for you, right? Shit, I feel like—


Ain't nobody prayin' for me
Ain't nobody prayin' for me
Ain't nobody prayin' for me
Ain't nobody prayin'


I feel niggas been out of pocket
I feel niggas tappin' they pockets
I feel like debatin' on who the greatest can stop it
I am legend, I feel like all of y'all is peasants
I feel like all of y'all is desperate
I feel like all it take is a second to feel like
Mike Jordan whenever holdin' a real mic
I ain't feelin' your presence
Feel like I'ma learn you a lesson
Feel like only me and the music though
I feel like your feelin' ain't mutual
I feel like the enemy you should know
Feel like the feelin' of no hope
The feelin' of bad dope
A quarter ounce manipulated from soap
The feelin', the feelin' of false freedom
I'll force-feed 'em the poison that fill 'em up in the prison
I feel like it's just me
Look, I feel like I can't breathe
Look, I feel like I can't sleep
Look, I feel heartless, often off this
Feelin' of fallin', of fallin' apart with
Darkest hours, lost it
Fillin' the void of bein' employed with ballin'
Streets is talkin', fill in the blanks with coffins
Fill up the banks with dollars
Fill up the graves with fathers
Fill up the babies with bullshit
Internet blogs and pulpit, fill 'em with gossip
I feel like this gotta be the feelin' where 'Pac was
The feelin' of an apocalypse happenin'
But nothin' is awkward, the feelin' won't prosper
The feelin' is toxic, I feel like I'm boxin' demons
Monsters, false prophets schemin'
Sponsors, industry promises
Niggas, bitches, honkies, crackers, Compton
Church, religion, token blacks in bondage
Lawsuit visits, subpoena served in concert
Fuck your feelings, I mean this for imposters
I can feel it, the phoenix sure to watch us
I can feel it, the dream is more than process
I can put a regime that forms a Loch Ness
I can feel it, the scream that haunts all logic
I feel like sayin' somethin', I feel like takin' somethin'
I feel like skatin' off, I feel like waitin' for 'em
Maybe it's too late for 'em
I feel like the whole world want me to pray for 'em
But who the fuck prayin' for me?


Ain't nobody prayin' for me
Who prayin' for me?
Ain't nobody prayin'
I take a sip of Hennessy and then get pissy drunk
I ain't a drinker, I'm a thinker, call it what you want
But if you turn your back, know that you just missed your chance
To witness the realest shit that's ever been told to man
I found myself losing focus at a Sunday service
Embarrassed so I start questioning God, "What is my purpose?"
He said to live the way he did, that's all he want from me
Spread the word and witness, he rose on the first Sunday
I said alright, enthused that my Lord gave a listen
I opened my Bible in search to be a better Christian
And this from a person that never believed in religion
But shit, my life is so fucked up, man; I can't help but give in
I'm giving testimonies to strangers I never met
Hopped on the pulpit and told them how I was truly blessed
Felt like I'm free from all my sins when the service was over
Walked out the church, then got a call that my homie was murdered
Then lost my faith again


What am I gonna do
Gotta have faith
Life is too much
I'm just through
Where is your faith?
(Don't you give up dont you give in...)
Faith
All you need is the size of a mustard seed


Single black parent from Compton raising children of four
That's four innocent bastards 'cause, papa, they don't know
Her day consists of working back and forth with babysitters
Can't find no one to watch her kids, so she pay her sister
Her baby daddy ain't 'bout shit, that nigga ain't 'bout shit
Spilt his daughter milk just to cop a new outfit
She pray to God every night, hoping that he'll mature
And maybe one day his kids something that he'll live for
Baby wanna go back to school, but she need some help
Because it's hard trying to pay the bills when you're by yourself
She thought about credit card scams, 'til she heard a voice
That said, "The Devil is a lie, make a better choice"
And so it's back to McDonald's and every month dealing
With those crazy ass people at the county building
Looked to the heavens and asked Him to make a better way
Then got a letter in the mail, lost her Section 8
Then lost her faith again


What am I gonna do
Gotta have faith
Life is too much
I'm just through
Where is your faith?
(Don't you give up dont you give in...)
Faith
All you need is the size of a mustard seed


I had dreams of holding a 9 milla to Ray's killa
Ask him why as my eyes fill up
Each day it gets more realer, orangutans bang like gorillas
It's jungle when the niggas in zoo
The rats lurking, vultures circling the serpents
Cats lying through they teeth, my nigga didn't deserve it
I flirted with the ideal of caressing the steel
To make karma come faster than she normally will
It's ill, to see my faith try and leave me
It's so hard to get it, to get rid of it is easy
I'm tryna reach Cloud 9, that's what my niggas 'bout
But it never rain in California unless the pistols out
Until then, my feet planted on the ground
Shadowboxing my conscience till my faith start responding
And if I get no answer, just know I tried
I should have never looked into his son's eyes
Rayshawn Boyce


What am I gonna do
Gotta have faith
Life is too much
I'm just through
Where is your faith?
(Don't you give up dont you give in...)
Faith
All you need is the size of a mustard seed


This for my people that stressing whenever times is hard
Your mind's slipping, wondering, "Is there really a God?"
Knowing you shouldn't think that way and trying to freeze your brain
But whenever there's pain, that feeling forever remains
We can't believe what we can't see and reality seems stronger than prayer
Cause you tried to change your life, and now you live in a wheelchair
And your son was born with cancer and he live in urgent care
At the tender age of 12, and you feel that no one cares
Searching for answers, that's human nature, you ain't in the wrong
Just know when you feeling that way His Spirit's in the room
I watched people I know pray and catch the Holy Ghost
And wonder why I ain't ever caught that feeling before
Maybe they know Him better, or I don't know no better
But what I do know, is that He's real and He lives forever
So the next time you feel like your world's about to end
I hope you studied because He's testing your faith again


I'd rather not live like there isn't a God
Than die and find out there really is
Think about it
A nigga so goddamn stressed out
I feel like fuck everything right now
See I've been broke too long, can't find a job to save my life
But I'll be damned if I give 'em my handout
See my pride is one thing I will not put aside
I'm too proud to beg, I'm sorry Left Eye
If I don't make it in life, motherfucker I tried
What? Uh


You ever feel like nobody never understands you but you?
Not your momma, your poppa, only person is you
Not your brother, your sister, the only person is you
You ever feel like nobody never understands you but you?
Nobody, nobody but you
So it feels like, like it's only you


So I'm feeling like I want to, I want to
I want to, I want to go so far from here
Very, very far from here
I need to, I need to
I need to, I need to go so far from here
Very, very far from here


It seems like, you can't win for losing
Whatever you're doing turns out to be "what-are-you-doing?"
Sick of pursuing, that your time will soon come
Nobody knows the position that you in
But it's a million people out there that's going through the same thing
That feeling, hard to explain
When you just, just want to get away
Something like


You ever feel like nobody never understands you but you?
Not your momma, your poppa, only person is you
Not your brother, your sister, the only person is you
You ever feel like nobody never understands you but you?
Nobody, nobody but you
So it feels like, like it's only you


So I'm feeling like I want to, I want to
I want to, I want to go so far from here
Very, very far from here
I need to, I need to
I need to, I need to go so far from here
Very, very far from here


Away from it all
Take me out of Hell where only Heaven can visit
The smartest astronomers, they won't even see my vision
I'm stuck on the studio couch now, thinking bout my daughter
Times is getting harder, another beat is slaughtered
Just press record or, seems like I need a mill' to keep my shit in order
Instead of problem solving
From my hat to my shoes, spirit laced with pride
Set some shit aside to help me wipe my teary eyes
Reaching for the skies, pissing on a cloud
Shitting on a bird's head, higher than a dread
As I fly through the galaxy, pain and the agony
Nothingness surrounding me, living my life
Though it's better to write
Configuring my style to the streets, bring dark to the light
So how you feel? My nigga, I keep it real
A Schoolboy soon to be star, Mr. Lamar


So I'm feeling like I want to, I want to
I want to, I want to go so far from here
Very, very far from here
I need to, I need to
I need to, I need to go so far from here
Very, very far from here


Fuck you, motherfucker, you a ho-ass nigga
I don't know why you trying to go big, nigga, you ain't shit
Walking around like you God's gift to Earth, nigga, you ain't shit
You ain't even buy me no outfit for the Fourth
I need that Brazilian, wavy, twenty-eight inch, you playin'
I shouldn't be fuckin' with you anyway
I need a baller-ass, boss-ass nigga
You's a off-brand-ass nigga, everybody know it
Your homies know it, everybody fuckin' know
Fuck you, nigga, don't call me no more
You won't know, you gonna lose on a good bitch
My other nigga is on, you off
What the fuck is really going on?


This dick ain't free
You lookin' at me like it ain't a receipt
Like I never made ends meet
Eating your leftovers and raw meat
This dick ain't free
Livin' in captivity raised my cap salary
Celery, tellin' me green is all I need
Evidently all I seen was Spam and raw sardines
This dick ain't free, I mean, baby
You really think we could make a baby named Mercedes
Without a Mercedes Benz and twenty-four inch rims
Five percent tint, and air conditioning vents?
Hell fuckin' naw, this dick ain't free
I need forty acres and a mule
Not a forty ounce and a pit bull
Bullshit, matador, matador
Had the door knockin', let 'em in, who's that?
Genital's best friend, this dick ain't free
Pity the fool that made the pretty in you prosper
Titty juice and pussy lips kept me obnoxious
Kept me up watchin' pornos in poverty; apology? No
Watch you politic with people less fortunate, like myself
Every dog has its day, now doggy style shall help
This dick ain't free
Matter of fact, it need interest
Matter of fact, it's nine inches
Matter of fact, see our friendship based on business
Pension, more pension, you're pinchin' my percents
It's been relentless, fuck forgiveness, fuck your feelings
Fuck your sources, all distortion, if you fuck it's more abortion
More divorce courts and portion
My check with less endorsement left me dormant
Dusted, doomed, disgusted, forced with
Fuck you think is in more shit?
Porcelain pipes pressure, bust 'em twice
Choice is devastated, decapitated the horseman
Oh America, you bad bitch, I picked cotton and made you rich
Now my dick ain't free


I'ma get my Uncle Sam to fuck you up
You ain't no king


Oh, oh, oh, oh, ohhhh, ohh
Oh, oh, oh, oh, ohhhh, ohh
(Breathing)
What's wrong, nigga?
I thought you was keeping it gangsta
I thought this what you wanted
They say if you scared, go to church
But remember, he knows the Bible too


Now, baby, when I get you, get you, get you, get you
I'ma go hit the throttle with you
Smoking, lokin', poking that doja 'til I'm idle with you
'Cause I (want you)
Now, baby, when I'm riding here, I'm riding dirty
Registration is out of service
Smoking, lokin', drinking that potion, you can see me swerving
'Cause I (want you)
(I want you more than you know)


I remember you took me to the mall last week, baby
You looked me in my eyes about four, five times
'Til I was hypnotized, then you clarified
That I (want you)
You said Sherane ain't got nothing on Lucy
I said, "You crazy?"
Roses are red, violets are blue
But me and you both pushing up daisies if I (want you)


Now, baby, when I get you, get you, get you, get you
I'ma go hit the throttle with you
Smoking, lokin', poking that doja 'til I'm idle with you
'Cause I (want you)


You said to me, you said your name was Lucy
I said, "Where's Ricardo?"
You said, "Oh, no, not the show"
Then you spit a little rap to me like this
When I turned twenty-six, I was like, "Oh, shit"
You said to me, I remember what you said too, you said:
"My name is Lucy, Kendrick, you introduced me, Kendrick
Usually I don’t do this but I see you and me, Kendrick
Lucy give you no worries, Lucy got million stories
About these rappers that I came after when they was boring
Lucy gon' fill your pockets
Lucy gon' move your mama out of Compton
Inside the gi-gantic mansion like I promised
Lucy just want your trust and loyalty, avoiding me?
It's not so easy, I'm at these functions accordingly
Kendrick, Lucy don't slack a minute, Lucy work harder
Lucy gon' call you even when Lucy know you love your Father
I'm Lucy, I loosely heard prayers on your first album, truly
Lucy don't mind, 'cause at the end of the day you'll pursue me
Lucy go get it, Lucy not timid, Lucy up front
Lucy got paperwork on top of paperwork
I want you to know that Lucy got you
All your life I watched you
And now you all grown up to sign this contract, if that’s possible"


Get you, get you, get you, get you
I'ma go hit the throttle with you
Smoking, lokin', poking that doja 'til I'm idle with you
'Cause I (want you)
Now, baby, when I'm riding here, I'm riding dirty
Registration is out of service
Smoking, lokin', drinking that potion, you can see me swerving
'Cause I (want you)


Oh, oh, oh, oh, ohhhh, ohh
Oh, oh, oh, oh, ohhhh, ohh


I remembered you was conflicted
Misusing your influence, sometimes I did the same
Abusing my power full of resentment
Resentment that turned into a deep depression
Found myself screamin' in the hotel room
I didn't wanna self destruct
The evils of Lucy was all around me
So I went runnin' for answers
Until I came home
Gather around. I'm glad everybody came out tonight. As we stand on our neighborhood corner, know that this fire that's burning represents the passion you have. Listen, Keisha, Tammy, come up front. I recognize all of you. Every creed and color. With that being said... fuck your ethnicity. You understand that? We gon' talk about a lot of shit that concerns you. All of you...


Now everybody, throw your hands up high
If you don't give a fuck, throw your hands up high


Now I don't give a fuck if you
Black, White, Asian, Hispanic, goddammit
That don't mean shit to me
Fuck your ethnicity, nigga


Fire burning inside my eyes, this the music that saved my life
Y'all be calling it hip-hop, I be calling it hypnotize
Yeah, hypnotize, trapped my body but freed my mind
What the fuck are you fighting for? Ain't nobody gon' win that war
My details be retail, man, I got so much in store
Racism is still alive, yellow tape and colored lines
Fuck that, nigga look at that line, it's so diverse
They getting off work and they wanna see Kendrick
Everybody can't drive Benz's, and I been there, so I make it my business
To give 'em my full attention, ten-hut! Man, I gotta get my wind up
Man, I gotta get down with God cause I got my sins up
Matter of fact, don't mistake me for no fucking rapper
They sit backstage and hide behind the fucking cameras
I mosh pit, had a microphone and I tossed it
Had a brain, then I lost it, I'm out of my mind
So don't you mind how much the cost is, penny for my thoughts
Everybody, please hold up your wallets
Yeah man, I'm the mailman, can't you tell, man?
Going postal, never freeze up, when I approach you
That's starstruck and roast you, oh my
HiiiPower


Reporting live from Planet Terminator X
I saw Martin Luther King with an AK-47


Now I don't give a fuck if you
Black, White, Asian, Hispanic, goddammit
That don't mean shit to me
Fuck your ethnicity, nigga


I'm tired of y'all, cause everybody lied to y'all
And you believe it? Recognize them false achievements
It's treason and I'm Tylenol, I knock out when you knock it off
Knock on the doors of opportunity, I'm too involved
I'm no activist, I'm no Einstein before calculus
I was kicking that math, dropping that science
Like an alchemist, and I be kicking that ass, lyrically I'm UFC
If a UFO had came for me, I'ma come back with the head of an alien
Don't alienate my dreams, get it right
Get a life, I got two, that's a metaphor for the big shit I do
Boy, TMI, TSA, man I'm fly, put wings on my back
That a plane or an angel? Both like a pilot with a halo, whoa... gross


I mean, I've seen so many things come through them, him, her, you
I'm just a messenger, yeah, I know life's a bitch, get the best of her
Put them 3's up, they notice that we up, HiiiPower
And the power in the people and if they don't believe us
They'll die
Wizard


Now I don't give a fuck if you
Black, White, Asian, Hispanic, goddammit
That don't mean shit to me
Fuck your ethnicity, nigga
This what God feel like, huh, he-yeah
Laughin' to the bank like, "A-ha!", huh, he-yeah
Flex on swole like, "A-ha!", huh, he-yeah
You feel some type of way, then a-ha!
Huh, he-yeah (A-ha-ha, a-ha-ha)


Ever since a young man (Since a young man)
All I wanna be was a gunman (Was a gunman)
Shootin’ up the charts, better run, man
Y'all gotta see that I won, man
Slick as El DeBarge with the finger waves, work it, JT
Handle bars like a fade, watch me work it, JT
I'm at large, runnin’ plays like a circuit, JT
I'm sellin' verses, JT, watch me work it, JT
Look, look… hol' up!
Don't judge me! My mama caught me with a strap
Don't judge me! I was young, fuckin' all the brats
Don't judge me! Aimin’ at your head for a stack
Don’t judge! Don't judge me! Now my home got a Valley peak
Don’t judge me! If I press your line you a freak
Don't judge me! Won't you tell a friend? Y'all gon’ see—


This what God feel like, huh, he-yeah
Laughin' to the bank like, "A-ha!", huh, he-yeah
Flex on swole like, "A-ha!", huh, he-yeah
You feel some type of way, then a-ha!
Huh, he-yeah (A-ha-ha, a-ha-ha)


Fuck is you talkin' to?
Ayy, do you know who you talkin' to?
Slide on you like fallen drapes
God toss full of carnivals
I kill 'em with kindness
Or I kill 'em with diamonds
Or I put up like fifteen hundred
Get yo' ass killed by the finest
Everything in life is a gamble
Nothin' in life I can't handle
Seen it all, done it all, felt pain more
For the cause, I done put blood on sword
Everything I do is to embrace y'all
Everything I write is a damn eight ball
Everything I touch is a damn gold mine
Everything I say is from an angel


I don't rush shit, fuck shit, always your shit, my shit
Cannonballs to ignite shit, morning to the night shift
I'm on, I ain't sorry for it
Asked for a piece of mind, you charged me for it
I wanna see sometimes if you ignore it
I'm in the streets sometimes and can't afford it
I got a bad habit, levitatin', duckin' haters
Oh my! My heart is rich, my heart is famous


This what God feel like
Huh, he-yeah (This what God feel like)
Laughin' to the bank like, "A-ha!"
(This what God feel like)
Huh, he-yeah (This what God feel like)
Flex on swole like, "A-ha!"
(This what God feel like)
Huh, he-yeah (This what God feel like)
You feel some type of way, then a-ha!
(This what God feel like)
Huh, he-yeah (This what God feel like)
This what God feel likeHgsCa

Dubbelquatrin om tennis

---

Zenith9

Summer 2016
D.R.A.M ft Lil Yachty - Broccoli
Kano - T-shirt Weather in The Manor
Jamie xx ft Young Thug -  I Know There's Gonna Be (Good Times)
Blood Orange - You're Not Good Enough
Francis and the Lights ft Bon Iver - Friends
HONNE - Good Together
The Avalanches ft Danny Brown & MF DOOM - Frankie Sinatra
Drake- Controlla
Frank Ocean- Forrest Gump
Anderson. Paak ft Schoolboy Q - Am I Wrong
Smino - Oxygen
Kanye West - Waves
Chance The Rapper ft 2Chainz & Lil Wayne - No Problem
Lil Yachty - One Night
Young Thug ft Travi$ Scott & Quavo - Pick Up the Phone
The Isley Brothers - Summer Breeze
Schoolboy Q - THat Part - Black Hippy Remix

---

ITSADITYA
Speedom - Tech N9ne (ft. Eminem & Krizz Kaliko)
Shelly - Tempa T
Wild Boy (Remix) - Machine Gun Kelly (ft. 2 Chainz, Meek Mill, Mystikal, French Montana, Yo Gotti & Steve-O)
Best Friend - Yelawolf (ft. Eminem)
B.A.D - Mista Silva
No Way - Futuristic
Turnt Up - Chris Webby (ft. Dizzy Wright)
Worldwide Choppers - Tech N9ne (ft. Busta Rhymes, Ceza, D-Loc, JL B.Hood, Twista, Twisted Insane, U$O & Yelawolf)
In My Zone - Rittz (ft. Mike Posner & B.o.B)
That's Not Me - Skepta (ft. JME)
Wicked Ways - Eminem
Brainsick 2.0 - Twisted Insane (ft. C.Ray, ISO, Kamikazi, Dikulz, Z)
The Greatest - Futuristic
Ballin Out - French Montana (ft. Jeremih & Diddy)
I-2604-I aka ChemicaLLordDaveHowell
Summertime -- Audio Adreneline
Walk Don't Run -- The Ventures
Lick it Up -- Kiss
Tokyo Summer -- Mounties
Just the Way You Are -- Milky

---

AriNikoBradshaw

Kanye West - "Wolves"
Years & Years - "King"
Empire of the Sun - "Walking on a Dream"
Tyler, the Creator - "Fucking Young"
Tyler, the Creator - "The Brown Stains of Darkeese Latifah Part 6-12 (Remix)"
Jack U / Justin Bieber - "Where Are U Now"
Kendrick Lamar - "King Kunta"
Flo Rida - "Wobble"
Sheppard - "Geronimo"
Walk the Moon - "Shut Up and Dance"

---

DukeAM

Nirvana - Live at Reading
Green Day - Dookie
Mac DeMarco - Salad Days
Led Zeppelin - IV

---

Mattw116
Cadillactica- Big KRIT
COMFORTZone- Saba
Long.Live.A$AP- A$AP Rocky
ATLiens- Outkast
Barter 6- Young Thug
Midnight Marauders- A Tribe Called Quest
Nietzsche
Summer 2012:bon iver - "holocene"
Royksopp - "happy up here"
Phoenix - "lisztomania"

Summer 2013:kanye west - "blood on the leaves"

Vampire weekend - modern vampires of the city

Outkast - "spottieottiedopaliscious"

Summer 2014:sylvan esso - "coffee"
Yung lean - "kyoto"
Rae sremmurd - "no flex zone"

Summer 2015:dylan brady - "little bando"
Xylo - "america"
Coyote kisses - "sunny day"
Sam gellaitry - "childhood"
Braids - "taste"
FanaHOVA

Chill:
- Retro - Gambino
- This Can't Be Life - Jay Z
- Too Much - Drake
- Venus vs Mars - Jay Z
- The Morning - The Weeknd
- Kush & Corinthians - Kendrick
- All I Need - Jay Z
- Addiction - Kanye
- Accordion - MFDoom
- Ain't That Easy - D'Angelo
- The Zone - The Weeknd
- What They Want - Q
- Let Me Love - Pusha T
- Sacrilegious - Q

Turn up:
- Killer - Drake
- Shoot To Thrill - AC/DC
- The Party - Gambino
- Dirt Off Your Shoulder - Jay Z
- Off That  - Jay Z
- Xxplosive - Dre
- m.A.A.d City - Kendrick
- Touch Too Much - AC/DC
- It's A Long Way To The Top (If You Wanna Rock n Roll) - AC/DC
- 1 Train - A$AP Rocky
- Nosetalgia - Pusha T
- F**k LA - Q
- Trophies - Drake
- 0 to 100 - Drake
- Energy - Drake
- Can't Stop - Theophilus London
- King Kunta  - Kendrick

---

Drxw

Daft Punk- Digital Love

James Fauntleroy- Fertilizer

Drake- 6 Man

Logic- All I Do

Chance the Rapper- Smoke Again

A$AP Rocky- Lord Pretty Flacko Jodye II

A$AP Ferg- Shabba

Travi$ Scott- Uptown

Maroon 5- Sugar

The Weeknd- Untitled (Mood Music)

Childish Gambino- Sober

Frank Ocean- channel ORANGE

PharaohPapi
Young Thug - Barter 6

Rich Gang - Rich Gang: Tha Tour Pt. 1

Kanye West - Yeezus

---

@JoshCroce

1. Big Sean ft. Jhene Aiko - I Know
2. Vic Mensa ft. Kanye West - U Mad
3. Drake - 6 Man
4. Travis Scott ft. Theophilus London & Paul Wall - Dance On the Moon
5. Chet Faker & Flume - Drop the Game
6. Leven Kali ft. Zack Sekoff - C.W.Y.B
7. Coasts - Oceans
8. Fetty Wap - RGF Island
9. Meek Mill ft. Big Sean & ASAP Ferg - B Boy
10. Tory Lanez - The Mission
11. Coin - Run
12. Shlohmo & Jeremih - No More
13. Rae Sremmurd - Come Get Her
14. Vic Mensa - Feel That
15. Travis Scott - Drive (The 1975 Remix)
16. Chet Faker - 1998
17. Jazz Cartier - Dead or Alive
18. PartyNextDoor - I Dont
19. Majid Jordan - A Place Like This
20. The Neighbourhood ft. G-Eazy - When I Get Back
21. G-Eazy - Tumblr Girls
22. Childish Gambino - Retro (Rough)
23. Drake - Find Your Love
24. Leks Rivers - Nubian
25. Kanye West - All Day

---

Zk123

1. DJ Jazzy Jeff & The Fresh Prince - Summertime

---

Dredre200064

Rap:

1. Waves - Joey Bada$$
2. Juice - Chance the Rapper
3. 10 2 10 - Big Sean
4. Guap - Big Sean
5. Sweatpants - Childish Gambino
6. G.O.M.D. - J. Cole
7. Started From The Bottom - Drake
8. Worst Behavior - Drake
9. Show Me What You Got - Jay-Z
10. Gorgeous - Kanye West
11. My Homies Still - Lil Wayne
12. Los Awesome - Schoolboy Q
13. Niggas In Paris - Jay-Z and Kanye West
14. Already Home - Jay-Z
15. Goldie - ASAP Rocky
16. Tom Ford - Jay-Z
17. Ashin' Kusher - Kid Cudi
18. Around My Way (Freedom Ain't Free) - Lupe Fiasco
19. Nikes On My Feet - Mac Miller
20. Tamale - Tyler, the Creator
21. Oh My Darling Don't Cry - Run The Jewels
22. Legendary - Wale
23. 88 - Wale
24. 6 Foot 7 Foot - Lil Wayne
25. Used 2 - 2 Chainz

Rock:

1. King Of The Beach - Wavves
2. You Only Live Once - The Strokes
3. White Sky - Vampire Weekend
4. Lasso - Phoenix
5. Hate To Say I Told You So - The Hives
6. Smells Like Teen Spirit - Nirvana
7. No Love - Hooray For Earth
8. A Sky Full Of Stars - Coldplay
9. Bugman - Blur
10. R U Mine? - Arctic Monkeys
11. Under Cover of Darkness - The Strokes
12. Mr. Brightside - The Killers
13. Helena Beat - Foster The People
14. Gold On The Ceiling - The Black Keys
15. Automatic Stop - The Strokes
16. Spirit Of The Night - Tesla Boy
17. Buddy Holly - Weezer
18. Supremacy - Muse
19. Fire It Up - Modest Mouse
20. Everybody Talks - Neon Trees
21. Drunk Girls - LCD Soundsystem
22. Walking On A Dream - Empire Of The Sun
23. Come Out And Play - The Offsrping
24. Good Life - OneRepublic
25. Surf Wax America - Weezer

---

DDXV

1. King Kunta - Kendrick Lamar
2. Easy Rider - Action Bronson
3. Dope Walk - A$AP Ferg
4. M'$ - A$AP Rocky
5. We Are Not Playing - Granddad Woolly
6. American You - Yelawolf
7. Still Dre - Dr Dre
8. U Mad - Vic Mensa
9. 2SEATER - Tyler, The Creator
10. Fucking Problems - A$AP Rocky

---

Khroam (Slade_Razor)
Alchemy - Mick Jenkins
After That - Future
Inside - Earl Sweatshirt
Sloppy Toppy - Travi$ Scott

With That - Young Thug
Know Yourself - Drake

---

TruSwag
Chief Keef - How It Go
Future - Fuck Up Some Commas
Rowdy Rebel - Computers (feat. Bobby Shmurda)
Drake - Know Yourself
Migos - Black Bottles (feat. Rick Ross)
Migos - Computers (Freestyle)
Future - 56 Nights (Song)
Travi$ Scott - Rodeo 
A$AP Rocky At.Long.Last.A$AP 

---

RizaN/Nazir

1.  Snoop Lion - Smoke The Weed
2.  Rowdy Rebel - Computers
3.  Drake - Know Yourself
4.  Wiz Khalifa - On My Level
5. Tech N9ne - On The Bible
6. Juicy J - Stop It
7.  Migos - Trenchez
8. UGK - The Game Belongs To Me
9.  Migos - People's Elbow

-  scHoolboyQdankazzkusH

---

VAM621

1. Kendrick Lamar - King Kunta
2. Kendrick Lamar - Money Trees
3. Kanye West - All Day
4. Drake - Legend
5. Drake - Pound Cake
6. ScHoolboy Q - Collard Greens
7. A$AP Rocky - Goldie
8. Vic Mensa - U Mad
9.  Vic Mensa - Down on my Luck
10. A Tribe Called Quest - Midnight Marauders (Album)

---

Open Mike Aguila

1-10. Lorde - Pure Heroine

---

Promethafiend

(Even though it's just about Winter in Australia)
1. Travi$ Scott - Quintana Pt.2
2. Kanye West - All Day
3. Free Gucci - Metro Thuggin
4. Jazz Cartier - The Valley
5. Earl Sweatshirt feat. Wiki - AM // Radio
6. Tyler the Creator - Deathcamp

---

Kay Rock

1. Kendrick Lamar - Alright
2. Tyler, the Creator - Deathcamp
3. Lil Wayne - Run This Town
4. A$AP Rocky - Goldie
5. Drake - 6 Man
6. Run the Jewels - Pew Pew Pew
7. Meek Mill - Ooh Kill Em'
8. Kendrick Lamar - West Coast Wu-Tang
8. ScHoolboy Q - Los Awesome
9. Kanye West - All Day
10. Tech N9ne - Speedom
11. Busta Rhymes - Why Stop Now
13. Kid Ink, Tyga, Wale, YG & Rich Homie Quan - Ride Out
14. Lil Wayne - Right Above It
15. Vic Mensa - U Mad
16. Yelawolf - Love Story
17. Tech N9ne - Wither
18. A$AP Rocky - Everyday
19. Vic Mensa - Run!
20. Drake - Too Much
21. Wiz Khalifa - See You Again
22. Wale - The Intro About Nothing

---

Sem_Groeneweg

Joey Bada$$ - Don't Front
Action Bronson - Easy Rider

---

Spencer4714

"King Kunta" by Kendrick Lamar
"Cadillactica" by Big KRIT
"Heavenly Father" by Isaiah Rashad
"Big Beast" by Killer Mike
"i" by Kendrick Lamar
"Never Catch Me" by Flying Lotus
"All Day" by Kanye West
"The Recipe" by Kendrick Lamar
"Christ Conscious" by Joey Bada$$
"You Ain't Gotta Lie (Momma Said)" by Kendrick Lamar
"Believe Me" by Lil Wayne
"Dots & Lines" by Lupe Fiasco
"Shine On" by Big KRIT
"Parental Advisory" by Jay Rock
"Rude Boy" by Aquino
"Fire Squad" by J. Cole
"Code Red" by Jay Rock
"No Joke" by Jay Rock
"Hood Gone Love It" by Jay Rock
"Close Your Eyes (And Count to Fuck)" by Run the Jewels
"Break the Bank" by Scoolboy Q
"The Bloom" by Wale
"California Love" by 2Pac
"Peaches N Cream" by Snoop Dogg

---

StillAtIt

Ice Cube - Today Was a Good Day
Nas - The World Is Yours
Nas - One Love
Notorious B.I.G. - Juicy
2Pac - Me Against the World
Jay Z - D'evils
Rakim - The 18th Letter
Dr. Dre - Xxplosive
Nas - Nas is Like
Nas - Money is My Bitch
Eminem - Bitch Please II
Xzibit - U Know
Xzibit - Front 2 Back
Jay Z - The Ruler's Back
Nas - Stillmatic Intro
Nas - Smokin'
Nas - 2nd Childhood
Nas - Book of Rhymes
Entire Get Rich or Die Tryin' LOL
Obie Trice - Love Me
Nas - U Wanna Be Me
Kanye West - Spaceship
Nas - Just a Moment
Young Buck - Bonafide Hustler
The Game -Dreams
The Game - Hate It or Love It
The Game - Runnin'
Stat Quo - Get Low
Obie Trice - Ballad of Obie Trice
Snoop Dogg - Imagine
Snoop Dogg - That's That Shit
Eminem - Drop the Bombs on 'em
Eminem - Untitled
The Game - The City
J. Cole - Can't Get Enough
Frank Ocean - Pink Matter
Kendrick Lamar - Bitch, Don't Kill My Vibe
Kendrick Lamar - Money Trees
Kendrick Lamar - Real
Nas - Reach Out
Big Sean - Nothing is Stopping You
Big Sean - Fire
Big Sean - Control
Eminem - Don't Front
Busta Rhymes - Calm Down
Dr. Dre - Kush
J. Cole - Hello
J. Cole - Apparently
Kendrick Lamar - It's on Again
PRhyme - PRhyme
PRhyme - U Should Know
50 Cent - This Is Murder This is not Music
Slaughterhouse - Y'all Ready Know
Big Sean - Stay Down
Big Sean - Deep
Drake - Legend
Kendrick Lamar - King Kunta
Kendrick Lamar - i

---

WuTangKillaBeeStankoniagbtalentx

1. Roll Deep - Good Times (ft. Jodie Connor)
2. Calvin Harris - Pray to God (ft. HAIM)
3. Game, 50 Cent - Hate It or Love It
4. Olly Murs - Army of Two
5. Dizzee Rascal - Goin' Crazy (ft. Robbie Williams)
6. Eric Prydz - Pjanoo
7. Lethal Bizzle - Pow 2011 (ft. JME, Wiley, Chip, Face, P Money, Ghetts, Kano)
8. DJ Khaled - I'm On One (ft. Drake, Rick Ross, Lil Wayne)
9. DJ Felli Fel - Feel It (ft. Sean Paul, Pitbull, Flo Rida, T-Pain)
10. Neon Jungle - Welcome to the Jungle
11. Maino - All the Above (ft. T-Pain)
12. Neon Jungle - Braveheart
13. Roll Deep - Green Light
14. Avicii - The Nights
15. Dexplicit - Bullacake
16. Fat Joe - What's Luv? (ft. Ashtani)
17. Kano - Ps and Qs
18. Fire Camp - Forward 2
19. S Club 7 - Don't Stop Movin'
20. Tinchy Stryder - Number 1 (ft. Dappy)
21. KlangKrassuell - Netzwerk (Falls Like Rain)
22. Devlin - Off With Their Heads (ft. Wretch 32)
23. Kray Twinz, Twista, Lethal Bizzle, Gappy Ranks - What We Do
24. Coolio - Gangster Paradise (ft. L.V.)
25. UnBalanced - Vessel (ft. Scarlett Quinn)

ChxckTheRhxmeGood Vibe
Little Brother - Morning
Kendrick Lamar - Money Trees
De La Soul - Much More
Drake - Know Yourself
Mick Jenkins - Dehydration
Joey Bada$$ - Christ Conscious
J Dilla - Believe in God
Birocratic - Sombre, Green
De La Soul - Sunshine
OutKast - Two Dope Boyz (In A Cadillac)
The Alchemist - Hold You Down
Lloyd Banks - I'm So Fly
Little Brother – Lovin It
Mobb Deep – The Learning (Burn)
50 Cent & Mobb Deep – Outta Control
J Dilla & Elzhi – Come Get It
Craig David – 7 Days
Gorillaz – Dirty Harry
The Foreign Exchange - Downtime
Kendrick Lamar - King Kunta
Drake - Worst Behaviour
DJ Jazzy Jeff & The Fresh Prince - Summertime

---

Alfaoito

The Weeknd - Untitled / Mood Music
Kanye West - All Day
Red Hot Chili Peppers - Dani California
Chris Brown - Don't Be Gone Too Long
Marina and The Diamonds - Radioactive
50 Cent - Ayo Technology
The Weeknd - Drunk In Love
Drake - Energy
Rae Sremmurd - No Type

---

Rapfanatic
**Albums**

The Strokes- Is This It
The Velvet Underground & Nico
David Bowie- Hunky Dory
Nirvana- Nevermind
Master of Puppets- Metallica
All Green Day albums up to 21CB
Neutral Milk Hotel In the Aeroplane Over the Sea
Smashing Pumpkins- Siamese Dream
Astral Weeks- Van Morrison
Licensed to Ill- Beastie Boys
Are You Experienced - Jimi Hendrix
A Love Supreme - John Coltrane
Death Certificate - Ice Cube

**Songs**

Rap:
The Real Slim Shady - Eminem
What These Bitches Want - DMX
U Know - Xzibit

Non-Rap:
White Teeth Teens - Alexie Gratia f/ Lorde

Rock:
Lithium - Nirvana
Come Out Swinging - The Offspring
Welcome to Paradise - Green Day
Going to Pasalacqua - Green Day
My Wave - Soundgarden

---

Tyrant

Summer 2013 in Europe was literally tracks 1-10 of Yeezus. Also heard a lot of Get Lucky & Blurred Lines cause they played that shit every third song in every club

---

Hellblazer

The "Allme" Playlist from 2+ years ago:
1. Azizi Gibson - Intro
2. Yung Lean - Gatorade
3. Mac Miller - Angel Dust
4. Azizi Gibson - Winners Circle
5. Domo Genesis - Arrival
6. A$AP Rocky - Peso
7. Drake - Days In Toronto (JustDame Refix) 
8. Flow - Ink Bleed Remix (Feat. Bonka, Kevin Gates & G. Wilson)
9. Danny Brown - Jealousy
10. Schoolboy Q - Blind Threats (Feat. Raekwon)
11. Armand Hammer - Shark Fin Soup
12. MF Doom - Air (Astronote Remix)
13. Domo Genesis - SS4
14. Schoolboy Q - Break The Bank
15. Yung Lean - Gatorade (Lido Remix)
16. Robb Bank$ - Counting (March)
17. Apollo Brown - Lower The Boom (Feat Oddisee, Kenn Starr & Sareem Poems)
18. OutKast - SpottieOttie Dopaliscious
19. Dexter - Pictures (Feat. Josa Peit)
20. Quasimoto - Planned Attack
21. Azizi Gibson - Ghost in the Shell
22. Kendrick Lamar - Poe Mans Dreams (His Vice) 
23. Redman - Whateva  Man
24. C2C - 2006 DMC World Team Championship Performance
25. Captain Murphy - Immaculation (Feat. Azizi Gibson and Jeremiah Jae)
26. Flatbush Zombies - Chuch
27. Yung Lean - Gatorade (Chopped & Saddened)

---

AryxSoulchild


1. Rihanna ft Chris Brown - Put It Up
2. Jhene Aiko's Souled Out album
3. Rihanna - Bitch Better Have My Money
4. Chris Brown & Tyga - Bunkin'
5. Chris Brown & Tyga - Remember Me
6. Fabolous ft Tamia - Into You
7. Amerie - Why Do We Fall In Love
8. Juvenile - Back That Azz Up
9. Ma$e ft Total - What You Want
10. Ja Rule ft Ashanti - Always on Time


---

Self-LoathingNarcissist
Rap:

Childish Gambino- Poke
Kendrick Lamar-The Recipe
Pusha T- Lunch Money
Kanye West- All Day
Vic Mensa- U Mad
A$AP Rocky- R. Cali
Earl Sweatshirt- Wool
Tyler the Creater- Smuckers
Hail Mary Mallon- Jonathan
Keith Ape-It G Ma

Other:

Washed Up- Feel it All Around
Lorde- Million Dollar Bills
Sleigh Bells- Rill Rill
HOLYCHILD- Happy With Me
Bad Rabbits- Doin' It
Tuxedo- So Good
Mac DeMarco-Chamber of Reflection

---

Gabyayo

1. Xenophobic Blind Left Hook by Saves The Day
2. Everyone I Know by K.Flay

---

PrettyLittleRockabilly

Arctic Monkeys - Suck It and See
The Beach Boys - California Girls
The Beach Boys - Surfin USA
The Kinks - Better Things
The Kinks - Don't Forget to Dance
Arctic Monkeys - Reckless Serenade
Arctic Monkeys - All My Own Stunts
The Goo Goo Dolls - Slide
The Goo Goo Dolls - Iris
Jamie Lawson - Wasn't Expecting That
The Monkees - Daydream Believer
The Beatles - And I Love Her
The Beatles - All My Loving
The Beatles - Here Comes The Sun
The Vamps - Can We Dance
The Vamps - Move My Way
Arctic Monkeys - The Blonde-O-Sonic Shimmer Trap
Ed Sheeran - Cold Coffee
The 1975 - Girls
Circa Waves - So Long
Circa Waves - Young Chasers
Ed Sheeran - Tenerife Sea
Green Day - Reject
Green Day - American Idiot
Arctic Monkeys - Evil Twin
The 1975 - Sex
The Smiths - This Charming Man

---

Babuc

2016 Playlist
Major Lazer - Jessica ft. Ezra Koenig
YEAHTIM - #GOATS

2015 Playlist
Oh Honey –  Wish You Were Here
Twenty one pilots – Stressed Out
Mark Ronson - Daffodils (feat. Kevin Parker)
Julian Moon – A Cup Of Coffee
Lorde –  Pure Heroine
The Postal Service -  Give Up
Vampire Weekend - A-Punk
Fergie – Fergalicious
Natasha Bedingfield – Unwritten
Natasha Bedingfield - Pocketful Of Sunshine

---

Owenn_B

Rap/R&B
The Weeknd - Rolling Stone
The Weeknd - Montreal
Meek Mill - Cold Hearted
Mac Miller - Wedding
Mac Miller - Fight the Feeling
Kendrick Lamar - Sing about me, Im Dying of Thirst
Kendrick Lamar - Mortal Man
Drake - Wednesday Night Interlude
Drake - Pound Cake
Frank Ocean - Swim good

Alt/Rock/Pop
The 1975 - Menswear
The 1975 - Antichrist
Chase Atlantic - Run Away
Circa Waves - T-shirt weather

Electronic
Atu - Vacant
Ekali - Unfaith
Tory Lanez (Ekali mix) - Henny in Hand

Sosad2112
Track 1 - 10
Track 11 - 20
Track 21 - 30
Track 31 - 40
Track 41 - 50
Track 51 - 60
Track 61 - 70
Track 71 - 80
Track 81 - 90
Track 91 - 100
Track 101 - 110
Track 111 - 120
Track 121 - 130

---

Drew_Harvie
Summer laid back playlist​
Swinelord"fire emoji"
";-;"
YABOYNICKYJay DayerCanadian Playlist
Canadian Playlist Pt. 2
Detroit Playlist

---

VinylZombie_MCR

- Pop
- Pop Punk /Rock

---

Old School Panther Dee

ImLUat the beach chillinMadkol

"Magic"—B.o.B
"Bang Bang Pow Pow"—T-Pain
"Right Above It"—Lil Wayne
"22"—Taylor Swift
"All I Do Is Win (Remix)"—DJ Khaled
"No Problem"—Chance The Rapper
"History"—One Direction
"Classic"—MKTO
"Clique"—Kanye West
"Like That"—Jack & Jack
"Better Than Revenge"—Taylor Swift
"The Real Slim Shady"—Eminem
"I'm So Paid"—Akon
"Broccoli"—D.R.A.M
"Sail"—AWOLNATION
"Hop Madness"—Hopsin
"The Story Of Us"—Taylor Swift
"Speedom"—Tech N9ne
"Look At Me Now"—Chris Brown
"Mercy"—Kanye West
"Sugar"—Maroon 5
"Lips Are Movin"—Meghan Trainor
"Cake By The Ocean"—DNCE
"Work From Home"—Fifth Harmony
"No Sleep"—Wiz Khalifa
"Hood Go Crazy"—Tech N9ne
"You're Such A"—Hailee Steinfeld
"Bad Mother Fucker"—Machine Gun Kelly
"Up Down (Do This All Day)"—T-Pain
"All You Had To Do Was Stay"—Taylor Swift
"Work"—Rihanna
"Good Life"—Kanye West
"I'm Goin In"—Drake
"Out Of My Mind"—B.o.B
"Roger That"—Young Money
"Only"—Nicki Minaj
"Smile"—Avril Lavigne
"Can't Stop The Feeling"—Justin Timberlake
"I Just Wanna Party"—YG
"Headband"—B.o.B
"No Hands"—Waka Flock Flame
"GangBang"—Wiz Khalifa
"Bandz A Make Her Dance"—Juicy J
"Centuries"—Fall Out Boy

---

Trialia:

Spotify Summer Rewind Playlist 2018
01 - Hayley Kiyoko - "Girls Like Girls"
02 - Lacuna Coil - "Purify"
03 - Chameleon Circuit - "Exterminate, Regenerate"
04 - Fall Out Boy - "Ghostbusters (I'm Not Afraid)"
05 - Demi Lovato - "Confident"
06 - Lacuna Coil - "Blood, Tears, Dust"
07 - Propellerheads - "Spybreak! (short one)"
08 - Aperture Science Psychoacoustic Laboratories - "Still Alive"
09 - Savage Garden - "I Want You"
10 - Lacuna Coil - "Lost Lullaby"
11 - Nine Inch Nails - "Sanctified"
12 - Creed - "Higher"
13 - Savage Garden - "To the Moon and Back"
14 - Lacuna Coil - "To Live is To Hide"
15 - Carina Round - "Let It Fall"
16 - Counting Crows - "Goodnight Elisabeth"
17 - Megadeth - "À Tout Le Monde (Set Me Free)" 
18 - Lacuna Coil - "Upsidedown"
19 - Avril Lavigne - "Tomorrow"
20 - Valletta - "Spybreak (Radio Mix)"
21 - Chameleon Circuit - "Gallifreyan History 101"
22 - Lacuna Coil - "The Army Inside"
23 - Savage Garden - "Carry On Dancing"
24 - Laura Nyro - "You've Really Got A Hold On Me"
25 - Enigma - "Gravity of Love"
26 - Lacuna Coil - "Against You"
27 - Within Temptation - "What Have You Done" 
28 - Demi Lovato - "Cool for the Summer"
29 - Them Are Us Too - "Creepy Love"
30 - Chameleon Circuit - "Type 40"
31 - Mors Syphilitica - "Ungrateful Girl"
32 - Anna Nalick - "Consider This"
33 - DJ Quicksilver - "Bellissima (Radio Edit)"
34 - Regicide - "Narcissus Echo"
35 - Indigo Girls - "Watershed"
36 - Oasis - "The Masterplan"
37 - Suzanne Vega - "Marlene On The Wall"
38 - Rob D - "Clubbed To Death (Kurayamino Mix)"
39 - Corinne Bailey Rae - "Put Your Records On"
40 - Linkin Park - "Castle of Glass"
41 - Alanis Morissette - "All I Really Want"
42 - Patti Smith - "Because the Night"
43 - Soundgarden - "Black Hole Sun"
44 - Delain - "Army of Dolls"
45 - Massive Attack - "Inertia Creeps"
46 - Indigo Girls - "Galileo"
47 - Lacuna Coil - "Wide Awake"
48 - Linkin Park - "Leave Out All The Rest"
49 - Hayley Kiyoko - "Sleepover"
50 - Scott McKenzie - "San Francisco (Be Sure to Wear Flowers in Your Hair)"

---
Where are you going now?
Why are you slowing down?
Why, why, why?


Where are we going?
Why are we slowing down?
Where are you going?
We should be growing now!


Try and visualize how to get it right
But my vision's so blurry
Tryna slow it down
Take us to the ground
But were always in a hurry now!
And if I could make this world spin a little slower
Then I would, and we could grow a little closer
I think we’re getting closer


Where are we going?
(Closer, closer, closer)
Why are we slowing?
We think we’re getting closer
Where are you going?
(Closer, closer, closer)
We should be growing now
Where are we going?
(Closer, closer, closer)
Why are we slowing?
We think we’re getting closer
Where are you going?
(Closer, closer, closer)
We should be growing now


So in conclusion
Sometimes we lose focus
Planning our whole demise
We’re getting the big picture and making it the wallet size
So to what's important in my life, I apologize
I hope to stay faithful, focused and sanctified
We all get distracted
The question is would you bounce back, or bounce back wards?
You wouldn’t know how to act or would you take action?
That's just a part of life and if your vision's impaired
You'll probably lose it all tonight


What’s going on Marvin, dearly departed?
Young Marta, Bar or Parker
Upon them all upon mighty days
But sweet alcoholic nights are feeling faraway
Son can only Skype with his pop, stop
He’s only feeling love from his mom
Got rocks in my stomach
I can feel my soul bleed, self-love
But I never want my son to be me, holla at me
So I pray until I feel it’s not working
I’m a showman on the surface
Either way, it’s perfect
You ever feel like the purpose ain't worth it?
Well I do, I’m the poster child for young fathers working
I swear to god I wanna be free
And he just wanna be me
And I just wanna be him
I’m jealous and discreetly
I’m one of your own
I’m trying to raise a child
Still trying to raise me right now
Where am I gone?


Try and visualize how to get it right
But my visions are blurry
Trying to slow it down
Stay close to the ground
But we were always in a hurry now
And if I could make this world spin a little slower
Then I would, and we could grow a little closer


Where are we going?
Why?
Why are you going?
Why are we growing apart?
We should be growing together?
Right?


H.O.C., H.O.C
All the real smokers get me H.O.C
All the real smokers get me H.O.C
H.O.C., H.O.C
All the real smokers get me H.O.C
All the real smokers get me H.O.C


Everybody know I spit that other shit
Shit that make you duck for cover shit
Shit that make you hop out your seat and slap your mother shit
Especially when Drop drop the beat
I drop jewels like my nuts dropped out of my briefs
Jump in the booth and shatter every rapper's dream
They jump in a sauna because I killed their self-esteem
That's a jab, you should bob and weave
Like Pam when Martin pulled jokes out his sleeve
I go in studio sessions and feel like a nerd
Cause I'm the only nigga there not smoking no herb
You telling me the kush make you think on level four?
I'm on five, you saying that I can level more?
In high school, my teachers thought I was smoking stress
Didn't know my eyes low cause of genetic defects
I stimulate my mind every time I think about the end of time
Creation of man, and Columbine


Bet you think that this some high shit that I wrote
Probably think I'm off the kush or the hydro
(Nope) I don't even smoke, I don't even smoke
I don't even smoke, I don't even smoke
I really appreciate that you share your Indo
But a sip of Henny is the farthest I would go
I don't even smoke, I don't even smoke
I don't even smoke, I don't even smoke


Look, nowadays everybody think they're big chiefers
Just cause they heard that new tape from Wiz Khalifa
Knowing damn well they can't hit the sour
They're new booties, they probably need baby powder
My skill shower over your city for 40 days
40 nights, off the chain, like freedom of slaves
Before you get it twisted, like 40 gays
My flow worth the earth, that's not to be appraised
Those the type of lines that I'm talking 'bout
You know the type of rhymes you don't talk about
Copy my session on a disc when the session ends
So my momma can have it and play it for her friends
Brag on me, like "My son's 'bout to win
Somehow, someday, and I don't care when"
I might hit the gin once a month
I'll let you inhale, like an atheist


Bet you think that this some high shit that I wrote
Probably think I'm off the kush or the hydro
(Nope) I don't even smoke, I don't even smoke
I don't even smoke, I don't even smoke
I really appreciate that you share your Indo
But a sip of Henny is the farthest I would go
I don't even smoke, I don't even smoke
I don't even smoke, I don't even smoke


I'll take you back to the 9th grade
When Dough Boy had me high for 4 days
That's my nigga, he a street nigga
Probably in your hood, fucking up your street, nigga
But anyway I think it was some purple
Told me "Don't hit it hard because it'll hurt you"
I didn't listen, I was floating like the Rose Parade
Swear to God a nigga seen some flying fishes
That was the Vegas trip, Hooters sponsored
The same time I start writing like a fucking monster
I'm Frankenstein every time this mothafucker ponders
Just underline every letter, capital K-D-O-T
Laying it flat out, like a tire with slow leaks
Now what you 'bout? Nothing huh
Am I a square cause I don't puff a square?
Are my raps too blunt to hit the blunt? Yeah


Bet you think that this some high shit that I wrote
Probably think I'm off the kush or the hydro
(Nope) I don't even smoke, I don't even smoke
I don't even smoke, I don't even smoke
I really appreciate that you share your Indo
But a sip of Henny is the farthest I would go
I don't even smoke, I don't even smoke
I don't even smoke, I don't even smoke


H.O.C., H.O.C
All the real smokers give me H.O.C
(Bitch I'm blowed!)
Nobody pray for me
It's been that day for me
Way (Yeah, yeah)


Ayy, I remember syrup sandwiches and crime allowances
Finesse a nigga with some counterfeits, but now I’m countin' this
Parmesan where my accountant lives, in fact I'm downin’ this
D'USSÉ with my boo bae tastes like Kool-Aid for the analysts
Girl, I can buy your ass the world with my paystub
Ooh, that pussy good, won't you sit it on my taste bloods?
I get way too petty once you let me do the extras
Pull up on your block, then break it down: we playin' Tetris
AM to the PM, PM to the AM, funk
Piss out your per diem, you just gotta hate 'em, funk
If I quit your BM, I still ride Mercedes, funk
If I quit this season, I still be the greatest, funk
My left stroke just went viral
Right stroke put lil' baby in a spiral
Soprano C, we like to keep it on a high note
It's levels to it, you and I know


Bitch, be humble (Hol' up, bitch)
Sit down (Hol’ up, lil’, hol' up, lil’ bitch)
Be humble (Hol' up, bitch)
Sit down (Hol' up, sit down, lil', sit down, lil’ bitch)
Be humble (Hol' up, hol' up)
Bitch, sit down (Hol' up, hol' up, lil' bitch)
Be humble (Lil' bitch, hol' up, bitch)
Sit down (Hol' up, hol' up, hol' up, hol' up)
Be humble (Hol' up, hol' up)
Sit down (Hol' up, hol' up, lil', hol' up, lil' bitch)
Be humble (Hol' up, bitch)
Sit down (Hol' up, sit down, lil', sit down, lil' bitch)
Be humble (Hol' up, hol' up)
Bitch, sit down (Hol' up, hol' up, lil' bitch)
Be humble (Lil' bitch, hol' up, bitch)
Sit down (Hol' up, hol' up, hol' up, hol' up)


Who that nigga thinkin' that he frontin' on Man-Man? (Man-Man)
Get the fuck off my stage, I'm the Sandman (Sandman)
Get the fuck off my dick, that ain't right
I make a play fucking up your whole life
I'm so fuckin' sick and tired of the Photoshop
Show me somethin' natural like afro on Richard Pryor
Show me somethin' natural like ass with some stretch marks
Still will take you down right on your mama's couch in Polo socks
Ayy, this shit way too crazy, ayy, you do not amaze me, ayy
I blew cool from AC, ayy, Obama just paged me, ayy
I don't fabricate it, ayy, most of y'all be fakin', ayy
I stay modest 'bout it, ayy, she elaborate it, ayy
This that Grey Poupon, that Evian, that TED Talk, ayy
Watch my soul speak, you let the meds talk, ayy
If I kill a nigga, it won't be the alcohol, ayy
I'm the realest nigga after all


Bitch, be humble (Hol' up, bitch)
Sit down (Hol' up, lil', hol' up, lil' bitch)
Be humble (Hol' up, bitch)
Sit down (Hol' up, sit down, lil', sit down, lil' bitch)
Be humble (Hol' up, hol' up)
Bitch, sit down (Hol' up, hol' up, lil' bitch)
Be humble (Lil' bitch, hol' up, bitch)
Sit down (Hol' up, hol' up, hol' up, hol' up)
Be humble (Hol' up, hol' up)
Sit down (Hol' up, hol' up, lil', hol' up, lil' bitch)
Be humble (Hol' up, bitch)
Sit down (Hol' up, sit down, lil', sit down, lil' bitch)
Be humble (Hol' up, hol' up)
Bitch, sit down (Hol' up, hol' up, lil' bitch)
Be humble (Lil' bitch, hol' up, bitch)
Sit down (Hol' up, hol' up, hol' up, hol' up)


My nigga, what it look like?


Niggas hatin', bitches hatin', babies dyin'
Bullets flyin', helicopters, police sirens, preachers lying
Genocism, criticism, unemployment, racism
Burning buildings, AIDS victims, cancer killin' no cure
Oil spillin', turmoil, poverty-stricken, police brutality
Kickin' ass of us Africans, hostages in Afghanistan
Not to mention another prison, child molesting
Cow intestines, Botox injections, earthquakes that's government tested
Secret society weapon, opium plant manifested
Then turn to crack then invested amongst us Blacks just a message
To hold us back, great depression amongst Iraq, no direction no Google map
Just a Tec for the soo-woop swerving, izuzu then blap blap blap
Adolescents go coocoo, mothers are boohoo crying
The governor keeps us starvin', these commercials keep us buyin'
These cigarettes supermarkets fill up our liver with triumph
Distincted livin' with science, no place to live in, no Zion
See that's forbidden, we fryin'
My nigga, what it look like?
That's exactly what Hell look like


Tell it like it is nigga, tell it like it is homeboy
Tell it like it is nigga, tell it like it is, tell them what's up!
Tell it like it is nigga, tell it like it is homeboy
Tell it like it is nigga, tell it like it is, tell them what's up!


My nigga, what it look like?


Malcolm laughing, Martin laughing, Biggie spittin'
Pac is rapping, Gregory tappin', people singing, bells is ringing
Children playing, angels praying, 14 karat golden streets, collard greens
Red wine, potato yams, turkey legs, calling every human being...
Everybody put three fingers in the air
The sky is falling, the wind is calling
Stand for something, or die in the morning
Section.80, HiiiPoWeR


Visions of Martin Luther staring at me
Malcolm X put a hex on my future, someone catch me
I'm falling victim to a revolutionary song, the Serengeti's clone
Back to put you backstabbers back on your spinal bone
You slipped your disc when I slid you my disc
You wanted to diss but jumped on my dick
Grown men never should bite their tongue
Unless you eating pussy that smell like it's a stale plum
I got my finger on the mothafuckin' pistol
Aiming it at a pig, Charlotte's web is going to miss you
My issue isn't televised, and you ain't gotta tell the wise
How to stay on beat, because our life's an instrumental
This is physical and mental, I won't sugar coat it
You'd die from diabetes if these other niggas wrote it
And everything on TV just a figment of imagination
I don't want plastic nation, dread that like a Haitian
While you mothafuckas waiting, I be off the slave ship
Building pyramids, writing my own hieroglyphs


Just call the shit HiiiPoWeR
Nigga, nothing less than HiiiPoWeR
Five-star dishes, food for thought, bitches
I mean the shit is, Huey Newton going stupid
You can't resist his HiiiPoWeR
Throw your hands up for HiiiPoWeR


Visions of Martin Luther staring at me
If I see it how he seen it, that would make my parents happy
Sorry mama, I can't turn the other cheek
They wanna knock me off the edge like a fucking widow's peak, uh
And she always told me pray for the weak, uh
Them demons got me, I ain't prayed in some weeks, uh
Dear Lord come save me, the devil's working hard
He probly clocking double shifts on all of his jobs
Frightening, so fucking frightening
Enough to drive a man insane, I need a license to kill
I'm standing on the field full of land mines
Doing the moonwalk, hoping I blow up in time
Cause 2012 might not be a fucking legend
Tryna be a fucking legend, the man of mankind
Who said a black man in the Illuminati?
Last time I checked, that was the biggest racist party
So get up off that slave ship
Build your own pyramids, write your own hieroglyphs


Just call the shit HiiiPoWeR
Nigga, nothing less than HiiiPoWeR
Five-star dishes, food for thought, bitches
I mean the shit is, Bobby Seale making meals
You can't resist his HiiiPoWeR
Throw your hands up for HiiiPoWeR


Every day we fight the system just to make our way
We been down for too long, but that's alright
We was built to be strong, cause it's our life, na-na-na
Every day we fight the system, we fight the system
We fight the system (Never like the system)
We been down for too long but that's alright, na-na-na


Who said a black man in the Illuminati?
Last time I checked, that was the biggest racist party
Last time I checked, we was racing with Marcus Garvey
On the freeway to Africa 'til I wreck my Audi
And I want everybody to view my autopsy
So you can see exactly where the government had shot me
No conspiracy, my fate is inevitable
They play musical chairs once I'm on that pedestal
Frightening, so fucking frightening
Enough to drive a man insane, a woman insane
The reason Lauryn Hill don't sing, or Kurt Cobain
Loaded that clip and then said bang
The drama it bring is crazy, product of the late 80's
Tryna stay above water, that's why we shun the navy
Pull your guns and play me, let's set it off
Cause a riot, throw a Molotov
Somebody told me them pirates had got lost
Cause we been off them slave ships
Got our own pyramids, write our own hieroglyphs


Just call the shit HiiiPoWeR
Yeah, nothing less than HiiiPoWeR
Five-star dishes, food for thought, bitches
I mean the shit is, Fred Hampton on your campus
You can't resist his HiiiPoWeR
Throw your hands up for HiiiPoWeR


Thug Life! Thug Life!


I wrote this record while thirty-thousand feet in the air
Stewardess complimenting me on my nappy hair
If I can fuck her in front of all of these passengers
They'll probably think I'm a terrorist, eat my asparagus
Then I'm asking her thoughts of a young nigga
Fast money and freedom, a crash dummy for dollars
I know you dying to meet him, I'll probably die in a minute
Just bury me with twenty bitches, twenty million
And a Comptown fitted


Hol' up (Hol' up), hol' up (Hol' up)
Hol' up (Hol' up), hol' up (Hol' up)
Yeah, big shit popping — Section.80


Back in this bitch, in the back of that bitch
With my back against the wall
And your bitch on the edge of my dick—jump off!
I call a bitch a bitch, a hoe a hoe, a woman a woman
I never did nothing but break the ground on top of the asphalt
Tire mark gave you evidence that I'm easily peddling
With the speed of a lightning bolt
As a kid I killed two adults, I'm too advanced
I lived my twenties at two years old, the wiser man
Truth be told, I'm like eighty-seven
Wicked as 80 reverends in a pool of fire with devils holding hands
From a distance don't know which one is a Christian, damn
Who can I trust in 2012? there's no one, not even myself
A Gemini screaming for help, somebody


Hol' up (Hol' up), hol' up (Hol' up)
Hol' up (Hol' up), hol' up (Hol' up)
Yeah, big shit poppin', everybody watchin'
When you do it like this, nigga, losing ain't a option
Hol' up (Hol' up), hol' up (Hol' up)
Hol' up (Hol' up), hol' up (Hol' up)
Yeah, big shit poppin' —
Hey, hey, kick her out the studio, Ali


24/7, nigga working his ass for it, she popping that ass for
The King of Diamonds with diamonds, I never do ask for it
They checking my passport, I'm too accustomed with customs
She callin' the task force, I killed it, somebody cuff him
They want me to fast-forward the game, and why you complain
When you niggas is past poor? You'll never hop in my lane
When you pushing a RAV4, you wrecking my Jaguar
You play like a bad sport, her feet on the dashboard


Hol' up (Hol' up), hol' up (Hol' up)
Hol' up (Hol' up), hol' up (Hol' up)
Yeah, big shit poppin', everybody watchin'
When you do it like this, nigga, losing ain't an option
Hol' up (Hol' up), hol' up (Hol' up)
Hol' up (Hol' up), hol' up (Hol' up)
Yeah, big shit poppin', everybody watchin'
When you do it like this, nigga


I wrote this record while thirty-thousand feet in the air
Stewardess complimenting me on my nappy hair
If I can fuck her in front of all of these passengers
They'll probably think I'm Osama
The plane emergency landed, it was an honor
Hol' up


K-Dot, pick up the phone, nigga
Every time I call, it's going to voicemail
Don't tell me they got you on some weirdo rap shit, nigga?
No socks and skinny jeans and shit, ha
Ha-ha-ha-ha-ha-ha-ha-ha-ha-ha-haha
Call me on Shaniqua's phone!


I been A-1 since day one, you niggas boo boo
Your home boy, your block that you're from, boo boo
Lil hoes you went to school with, boo boo
Baby mama and your new bitch, boo boo
We was in the hood, 14 with the deuce-deuce
14 years later going hard, like we used to on the dead homies
On the dead homies


I don't give a fuck about no politics in rap, my nigga
My lil' homie Stunna Deuce ain't never comin' back, my nigga
So you better go hard every time you jump on wax, my nigga
Fuck what they talkin' 'bout, your shit is where it's at, my nigga
Came in this game, you stuck your fangs in this game
You wore no chain in this game, your hood, your name in this game
Now you double up, time to bubble up the bread and huddle up
Stickin' to the scripts, now here if them Benjamins go cuddle up
Skip, hop, drip, drop, flip, flop with the white tube sock
It goes "Sherm Sticks, burn this"
That's what the product smell like when the chemicals mix
50 nigga salute, out the Compton zoo, with the extras
El Cos, Monte Carlos, Road Kings, and dressers
Rip Ridaz, P-Funkers, Mexicans, they fuck with you
Asians, they fuck with you, nobody can fuck with you


I been A-1 since day one, you niggas boo boo
Your homeboy, your block that you're from, boo boo
Lil hoes you went to school with, boo boo
Baby mama and your new bitch, boo boo
We was in the hood, 14 with the deuce-deuce
14 years later going hard, like we used to on the dead homies
On the dead homies


Hopped out the Caddy, just got my dick sucked
The little homies called and said, "the enemies done cliqued up"
Oh, yeah? Puto want to squabble with mi barrio?
Oh, yeah? Tell 'em they can run it for the cardio
Oh, yeah? Everythin' is everythin', it's scandalous
Slow motion for the ambulance, the project filled with cameras
The LAPD gamblin', scramblin', football numbers slanderin'
Niggas names on paper, you snitched all summer
Streets don’t fail me now, they tell me it's a new gang in town
From Compton to Congress, set trippin’ all around
Ain't nothin' new, but a flu of new Demo-Crips and Re-Blood-licans
Red state versus a blue state, which one you governin'?
They give us guns and drugs, call us thugs
Make it they promise to fuck with you
No condom, they fuck with you, Obama say, "What it do?"


Obama say, "What it do?"
Obama say, "What it do?"
Obama say, "What it do?"


I been A-1 since day one, you niggas boo boo
Your homeboy, your block that you're from, boo boo
Lil hoes you went to school with, boo boo
Baby mama and your new bitch, boo boo
We was in the hood, 14 with the deuce-deuce
14 years later going hard, like we used to on the dead homies
On the dead homies


Everybody want to talk about who this and who that
Who the realest and who wack, or who white or who black
Critics want to mention that they miss when hip-hop was rappin'
Motherfucker, if you did, then Killer Mike'd be platinum
Y’all priorities fucked up, put energy in wrong shit
Hennessy and Crown Vic, my memory been gone since
Don’t ask about no camera blocking at award shows
No, don’t ask about my bitch, no, don’t ask about my Vogues
'Less you askin' me about power, yeah, I got a lot of it
I'm the only nigga next to Snoop that can push the button
Had the Coast on standby
“K. Dot, what up? I heard they opened up Pandora’s box”
I box ‘em all in, by a landslide
Nah homie we too sensitive, it spill out to the streets
I make the call and get the coast involved then history repeats
But I resolved inside that private hall while sitting down with Jay
He said "it's funny how one verse could fuck up the game"


I been A-1 since day one, you niggas boo boo-


I remember you was conflicted
Misusing your influence
Sometimes I did the same
Abusing my power full of resentment
Resentment that turned into a deep depression
Found myself screaming in a hotel room
I didn't want to self-destruct
The evils of Lucy was all around me
So I went running for answers
Until I came home
But that didn't stop survivors guilt
Going back and forth
Trying to convince myself the stripes I earned
Or maybe how A-1 my foundation was
But while my loved ones was fighting a continuous war
Back in the city
I was entering a new one
How much a dollar really cost?
The question is detrimental, paralyzin' my thoughts
Parasites in my stomach keep me with a gut feeling, y'all
Gotta see how I’m chillin' once I park this luxury car
Hopping out feeling big as Mutombo
"20 on pump 6," dirty Marcellus called me Dumbo
20 years ago, can't forget
Now I can lend him a ear or two
How to stack these residuals tenfold
The liberal concept of what men'll do
"20 on 6," he didn't hear me
Indigenous African only spoke Zulu
My American tongue was leery
Walked out the gas station
A homeless man with a semi-tan complexion
Asked me for ten rand, stressin' about dry land
Deep water, powder blue skies that crack open
A piece of crack that he wanted, I knew he was smokin'
He begged and pleaded
Asked me to feed him twice, I didn't believe it
Told him, "Beat it"
Contributin' money just for his pipe—I couldn't see it
He said, "My son, temptation is one thing that I've defeated
Listen to me, I want a single bill from you
Nothin' less, nothin' more"
I told him I ain't have it and closed my door
Tell me; how much a dollar cost?


It's more to feed your mind
Water, sun and love, the one you love
All you need, the air you breathe


He's starin' at me in disbelief
My temper is buildin', he's starin' at me, I grab my key
He's starin' at me, I started the car, then I tried to leave
And somethin' told me to keep it in park until I could see
The reason why he was mad at a stranger
Like I was supposed to save him
Like I'm the reason he's homeless and askin' me for a favor
He's starin' at me, his eyes followed me with no laser
He's starin' at me, I notice that his stare is contagious
'Cause now I'm starin' back at him, feelin' some type of disrespect
If I could throw a bat at him, it'd be aimin' at his neck
I never understood someone beggin' for goods
Askin' for handouts, takin' it if they could
And this particular person just had it down pat
Starin' at me for the longest until he finally asked
"Have you ever opened up Exodus 14?
A humble man is all that we ever need"
Tell me; how much a dollar cost?


It's more to feed your mind
Water, sun and love, the one you love
All you need, the air you breathe


Guilt trippin' and feelin' resentment
I never met a transient that demanded attention
They got me frustrated, indecisive and power trippin'
Sour emotions got me lookin' at the universe different
I should distance myself, I should keep it relentless
My selfishness is what got me here, who the fuck I'm kiddin'?
So I'ma tell you like I told the last bum
Crumbs and pennies, I need all of mines
And I recognize this type of panhandlin' all the time
I got better judgment, I know when nigga's hustlin', keep in mind
When I was strugglin', I did compromise, now I comprehend
I smell Grandpa's old medicine, reekin' from your skin
Moonshine and gin, nigga you're babblin', your words ain't flatterin'
I'm imaginin' Denzel but lookin' at O'Neal
Kazaam is sad thrills, your gimmick is mediocre
The jig is up, I seen you from a mile away losin' focus
And I'm insensitive, and I lack empathy
He looked at me and said, "Your potential is bittersweet"
I looked at him and said, "Every nickel is mines to keep"
He looked at me and said, "Know the truth, it'll set you free
You're lookin' at the Messiah, the son of Jehovah, the higher power
The choir that spoke the word, the Holy Spirit
The nerve of Nazareth, and I'll tell you just how much a dollar cost
The price of having a spot in Heaven, embrace your loss—I am God"


I washed my hands, I said my grace
What more do you want from me?
Tears of a clown, guess I'm not all what it's all meant to be
Shades of grey will never change if I condone
Turn this page, help me change to right my wrongs


The homies say I'm the truest
The bitches think I'm the cutest
The definition what cool is
Boy, I thought you knew this
Bitch, I do this!


Uh, I used to wanna be like Michael Jordan
Figured that I hit the NBA and make a fortune
Thank God for these rap recordings
I can ball like him on every verse and chorus
501s, Louis letterman jacket
Little brother only 5, momma put him on my taxes
You know that Compton ghetto shit
That every section 8 tenant is familiar with
Ooh wee, they say he something like the 70s
But I'm from '87, with a thousand dimes
You got 80 sevens
Gourmet sneakers, hair nappy
Fucking all my high school teachers
That was '05 bro
And I don't like 'em if the ass thin
And I don't wife 'em if a nigga is her best friend
The fuck I look like?
A million bucks, and that's why


The homies say I'm the truest
The bitches think I'm the cutest
The definition what cool is
Boy, I thought you knew this
Bitch, I do this!
Bitch, I do this!
Bitch, I do this!
The definition what cool is
Boy, I thought you knew this
Bitch, I do this


She looking at the car like she wanna fuck it
She looking at the wrist like she wanna fuck it
Hating on her girlfriend just so I can fuck it
She say she on birth control, no I don't trust it (Ho)
Uh, So give me fifty feet champ
Run until I got a bunion and my feet cramp
I'm in the hot spot, I know they seats damp
And I don't need your cosign, that's a cheap stamp
You-you niggas check this cash and I'm GT crashing
105 off-ramp, hey
And little nigga got it going on, G5
Going, going, going, gone
Cloud 9 mind state
I drop a record then I raise the crime rate
Killing this shit, where's your funeral tie
A-B-C-D-E-F-G, fuck skip to Y


The homies say I'm the truest
The bitches think I'm the cutest
The definition what cool is
Boy, I thought you knew this
Bitch, I do this!
Bitch, I do this!
Bitch, I do this!
The definition what cool is
Boy, I thought you knew this
Bitch, I do this


She looking at the car like she wanna fuck it
She looking at the wrist like she wanna fuck it
Hating on her girlfriend just so I can fuck it
She say she on birth control, no I don't trust it
First off I'm a rider, bitch
Put them 26's on a Silverado, bitch
I keep my bitch with a finer bitch
Snap my fingers, she'll go find a bitch
Tell them fuck boys that I do this
Got the best product 'round town, Frank Lucas
Confuse 'em like a Rubix cube when I roll up
Ok, Subway bread like some cold cuts
And I drop cold cuts, bitches go crazy
Wild like a Haitian, I should set up shop in Haiti
Fuck you, pay me. Paper over pussy, nigga
When I drop you ain't getting paper nor pussy, nigga


Bitch, I do this
Bitch, I do this
The definition of cool is
Boy I thought you knew this
Bitch, I do this


Lord forgive me


Kill him where he stand and stand over him
Shake his hand then jump back in that minivan
Double back to his block and blam
I ain't backing down for nothing
I'ma back 'em down like Shaq
With this black 2-2-3 in my hand
Better pray that this chopper jam like a radio single, man
Police radio signals saying that a 187 land on your corner
Coroners comfort your momma
"Momma, he's dead," the next morning
I toasted up with my homies, we drink and smoke marijuana
Want us to change our ways? Uh-huh
You see this game we play come from
Uncles that raised me in Compton
Ask me what I have accomplished
I don't know, I don't have conscience
I just load up and start dumping
On enemies; I'm head huntin', no sympathy, ain't no love
When you in these streets, just get something
Protect your neck 'cause they coming
For sets, respect, split your onion
Then chop your deck
Your head tumbling like gymnastics (Ooh...)
'Cause ignorance is bliss


Now everybody put your hands up high
If you don't give a fuck, put your hands up high


This the hardest shit you've heard from LA this far
And I'm this far from a discharge, but never will I diss y'all
We all tryna ball, and when I got the rock, I'll dish off
Until the day I pistol-whip you posers 'til y'all pissed off
Then peel off in a hooptie
Come back and make these niggas wanna shoot me


And they bitches wanna salute me or seduce me
Indubitably, I'm too street—indubitably, I'ma do me
Better than your bitch would, 'cause you niggas too weak
But just give me two weeks and I'm good
I'll make an album that'll put a smile on Malcolm
Make Martin Luther tell God I'm the future for Heaven's talent
No tarot card reading; I'm foreseeing you niggas vanish
Not only from the rap game, I'm including the planet
Cats so watered-down clowns can sink Titanic
Tie titanium around their neck and watch 'em panic
Give me respect, dammit, or get damaged
Die young, corpse identified by your parents
Apparently, you're a parrot, mocking me and my blueprint
But I won't share it just make you cop it, then call you a sheriff
Stop it, I'm hearin' the comments
The critics are calling me conscious
But truthfully, every shooter be callin' me Compton
So truthfully, only calling me Kweli and Common?
Proves... that ignorance is bliss


Now everybody put your hands up high
If you don't give a fuck, put your hands up high


And this still the hardest shit you've heard from LA this far
And I'm this far, from a discharge, but never will I diss y'all
This my world, I grab the universe then play kickball
And they wonder why these California earthquakes hittin' so hard


I'm So-Cal, you so-called rappers need to go call
Ghostbusters 'cause you busters are Casper when I go off
I show up, to show out and show off
You a hundred percent behind me
And if you are, then wreck your car
And walk up to my crime scene
I remember bein' 17, wishin' someone would sign me
Now the only way these labels get me back
Is when they rewind me
Backin' down bargains, backin' down bitches
We gon' flip her
Once she off that blue dolphin, you gon' tip her
'Cause ignorance is bliss


And Willie B, I'm a fool on your beats
I bleed out the speaker
As the speaker that spoke when they didn't speak


What money got to do with it
When I don't know the full definition of a rap image?
I'm trapped inside the ghetto and I ain't proud to admit it
Institutionalized, I keep runnin' back for a visit, hol' up
Get it back
I said I'm trapped inside the ghetto and I ain't proud to admit it
Institutionalized, I could still kill me a nigga, so what?


If I was the president
I'd pay my mama's rent
Free my homies and them
Bulletproof my Chevy doors
Lay in the White House and get high, Lord
Whoever thought?
Master, take the chains off me!




Zoom, zoom, zoom, zoom, zoom
Zoom, zoom, zoom
Zoom, zoom, zoom, zoom, zoom
Zoom, zoom, zoom
Zoom, zoom, zoom, zoom, zoom
Zoom, zoom, zoom
Zoom, zoom, zoom, shit


Life to me, like a box of chocolate
Quid pro quo, somethin' for somethin', that's the obvious
Oh shit, flow's so sick, don't you swallow it
Bitin' my style, you're salmonella poison positive
I can just alleviate the rap industry politics
Milk the game up, never lactose intolerant
The last remainder of real shit, you know the obvious
Me, scholarship? No, streets put me through colleges
Be all you can be, true, but the problem is
Dream only a dream if work don't follow it
Remind me of the homies that used to know me, now follow this
I'll tell you my hypothesis, I'm probably just way too loyal
K Dizzle will do it for you, my niggas think I'm a god
Truthfully all of 'em spoiled, usually, you're never charged
But somethin' came over you once I took you to them fuckin' BET Awards
You lookin' at artistses like they're harvestses
So many Rollies around you and you want all of them
Somebody told me you thinkin' 'bout snatchin' jewelry
I should've listened when my grandmama said to me


Shit don't change until you get up and wash yo' ass, nigga
Shit don't change until you get up and wash yo' ass, boy
Shit don't change until you get up and wash yo' ass, nigga
Oh now, slow down


And once upon a time, in a city so divine
Called West Side Compton, there stood a little nigga
He was five foot somethin', God bless the kid
Took his homie to the show and this is what they said


"Fuck am I 'posed to do when I'm lookin' at walkin' licks?
The constant big money talk 'bout the mansion and foreign whips
The private jets and passport, presidential glass floor
Gold bottles, gold models, givin' up the ass for
Instagram flicks, suckin' dick, fuck is this?
One more sucker wavin' with a flashy wrist
My defense mechanism tell me to get him
Quickly because he got it
It's a recession, then why the fuck he at King of Diamonds?
No more livin' poor, meet my four-four
When I see 'em, put the per diem on the floor
Now Kendrick, know they're your co-workers
But it's gon' take a lot 'fore this pistol go cold turkey
Now I can watch his watch on the TV and be okay
But see I'm on the clock once that watch landin' in LA
Remember steal from the rich and givin' it back to the poor?
Well, that's me at these awards"
I guess my grandmama was warnin' a boy
She said...


Shit don't change until you get up and wash yo' ass, nigga
Shit don't change until you get up and wash yo' ass, boy
Shit don't change until you get up and wash yo' ass, nigga
Oh now, slow down


And once upon a time, in a city so divine
Called West Side Compton, there stood a little nigga
He was five foot something, dazed and confused
Talented but still under the neighborhood ruse
You can take your boy out the hood
But you can't take the hood out the homie
Took his show money, stashed it in the mozey wozey
Hollywood's nervous
Fuck you, goodnight, thank you much for your service
Sit still, and close your eyes (Smoke to it)
What's behind the other door, oh
No more silence, don't kill this thing we got called love
Just searching for the perfect shot


When love comes calling, don't love back
When love comes calling, don't look away
When love comes calling, don't look back
When love comes calling, don't look away


I used to write rhymes, all day and all night
While you were playing PlayStation, my pencil was erasing lines
My conscious only knew whats half tight
At 3:14, it's time to give me a slice, my nigga
This is a dog's fight, my nigga
The soundtrack to life, my nigga
Kendrick Lamar, his momma called him that
He watched House Party, and ate Apple Jacks
Sold Sega games, his cousin sold crack
He pumped Reeboks, his uncles pumped packs
Pump, fake, jumpshot, ball hit the back
Board dreams of being pointguard was off limits jack
That's because that's these Compton streets was built not to win
You killed the nigga, I stole a bible, is that a sin?
Pardon me though, I'm searching for answers
The good kid from the ugly city, that's mad that he's handsome
Where is the love?


When love comes calling, don't love back
When love comes calling, don't look away
Where is the love?
When love comes calling, don't look back
When love comes calling, don't look away


Give me rings, give me chains, mane
Give me a blue Benz, red Porsche, red Range
Give me black bitches, white hoes, new clothes
A mansion with marble floors and security codes
Then give me some land, or maybe I'll land a, G5
Clearport, say hello to the man
Give me awards, grammies, and let the crowd applaud
My name 'til they strain the veins in they vocal cords
Give me fame and fortune, me and Trump on golf courses
With that being said, give me Tiger sports endorsements
Give me billboards, whatever that people will kill for
Manahattan and 40/40, no 40's but rose poured
Give me vanity, give me Kurt Cobain sanity
Give me a city where Channel 7 newscasters cameras be
Give me horror like Amity, no, give me the charts
And if you ever renege, I'll still give you Kendrick Lamar, this is me
And that's love


When love comes calling, don't love back
When love comes calling, don't look away
When love comes calling, don't look back
When love comes calling, don't look away


Now everybody smoke to it, for this is, the celebration


Fancy girls on Long Beach Boulevard
Flagging down all of these flashy cars


Uh, and Lord knows she's beautiful
Lord knows the usuals leaving her body sore
She take the little change she make to fix her nail cuticles
Lipstick is suitable to make you fiend for more
She play Mr. Shakur, that's her favorite rapper
Bumping "Brenda's Got a Baby" while a pervert yelling at her
And she capture features of a woman, but only 17
Then seven cars start honking
She start running like Flo-Jo, don't care if they Joe Blow
If they got money to blow, a blow job is a sure go
And sure enough don't see a dime of dirty dollars
She give it all to her daddy but she don't know her father
That's ironic
See, a block away from Lueders Park, I seen the El Camino parked
And in her heart, she hate it there, but in her mind she made it where
Nothing really matters, so she hit the back seat
Rosa Parks never a factor when she making ends meet


Fancy girls on Long Beach Boulevard
Flagging down all of these flashy cars


And Lord knows she's beautiful
Lord knows the usuals leaving her body sore
Her anatomy is God's temple
And it's quite simple, her castle is 'bout to be destroyed
She's always paranoid, watching the law inside the streets
Undercovers the dummies that look like decoys
Remember the sergeant let her slide, said if he seen
What's between her thighs he'd compromise, to no surprise
She took the ultimatum 'round the alleyway and gave him
A warm welcome that filled him right below the navel
Though he was wired up like a pair of jumping cables
His eyes was closed shut, prior charges, he had waived 'em
It was a block away from Lueders Park, I seen a squad car parked
And in her heart, she hate it there but in her mind
She made it where nothing really matters, so she hit the back seat
'Cause Rosa Parks never a factor when she topping off police


Fancy girls on Long Beach Boulevard
Flagging down all of these flashy cars


And Lord knows she's beautiful
Lord knows the usuals leaving her body sore
As she bust down like a 12 bunk on tour
She suddenly realized, she'll never escape the allure
Of a black man, white man, needing satisfaction
At first, it became a practice, but now she's numb to it
Sometimes she wonder if she can do it like nuns do it
But she never heard of Catholic religion or sinners' redemption
That sounds foolish, and you can blame it on her mother
For letting her boyfriend slide candy under her cover
10 months before she was 10 he moved in
And that's when he touched her
This mothafucka is the fucking reason why Keisha rushing to that
Block away from Lueders Park
I seen the El Camino park
And in her heart she hate it there but in her mind
She made it where nothing really matters, still she hit the back seat
Then caught a knife inside the bladder
Left for dead, raped in the street
Keisha's song


My little sister 11, I looked her right in the face
The day that I wrote this song, sat her down and pressed play


Fancy girls on Long Beach Boulevard
Flagging down all of these flashy cars
Fancy girls on Long Beach Boulevard, oh
Flagging down all of these flashy carsDramatic Structure can be defined as the organization of certain events in a narrative. Freytag’s pyramid states that there are 5 essential elements to the dramatic structure of a narrative: exposition, rising action, climax, falling action, and denouement (resolution). Though many MC’s utilize these elements in their storytelling songs, none can match Kendrick Lamar

There’s plenty of Kendrick songs that demonstrate this, noteworthy ones including “How Much A Dollar Cost”, “Blacker The Berry”, “Swimming Pools”, and “The Heart Pt.2”, but I’m going to break down the best example of this, the (depressingly) unreleased “Untitled” song that was performed on the Colbert Report

Exposition

Introduction of background information

So I met this young lady, ya know, when I went back home. I was tryna spit my best game to her, you know, give her my best cap, but she kept on snapping her fingers like snaps. I said “You know what, girl? You crazy.” Then she asked me what he said

Kendrick starts out with a soft-spoken, relaxed intro, explaining what provoked the discussion in the rest of the song. One thing to pay attention to is the instrumentation- the lyrics aren’t the only thing experiencing a dramatic progression. The smooth, jazzy beat mixed with the snaps sets a calm tone for the beginning, as if it was the calm before the “storm”

Rising Action

Culmination of events leading to the climax

The rising action consists of Kendrick’s explanation of what the “minority” races believe success can be defined as. As Kendrick slowly raises his voice, the instrumentation is slowly layered, adding on occasional hits and strums of different instruments until they become more frequent, leading to the climax

Climax

Point of greatest drama

As Kendrick reaches the point of what the white man says, his tone immediately becomes more aggressive and is raised to it’s loudest point so far. All the instrumentation comes in together along with extra vocals, causing an intense moment that you just can’t help but get chills from. This is also the climax from a lyrical standpoint in that the white man contrasts all the other races, wishing to take from each of them out of greed

Falling Action

Culmination of events leading to the resolution

Kendrick cues in Terrace Martin to play the saxophone for a musical interlude. This break in the song allows for a path to a calm ending, the resolution

Resolution



Solution of previous drama

I holler, “What you do? What you say?"
I shall enjoy the fruits of my labor if I get freed today

Kendrick repeats this line to act as an assertion of the solution, which is to live off the benefits of your own hard work. Much like the exposition, the instrumentation is basic and Kendrick is calm…

But wait, there’s more!

Just when you think the song will end, Kendrick adds on vocals from each member of the crew after each repeat of the hook. When everyone joins in together, they finish off the song shouting:

What the black man say?
Tell ‘em we don’t die, tell 'em we don’t die
Tell 'em we don’t die, we multiply
Tell 'em we don’t die, tell 'em we don’t die
Tell 'em we don’t die, we multiply
Tell 'em we don’t die, tell 'em we don’t die
Tell 'em we don’t die, we multiply
Tell 'em we don’t die, tell 'em we don’t die
Tell 'em we don’t die, we multiply

This outro is almost a repetition of the structure of the rest of the song. Kendrick builds it up just to break it down once again

In Conclusion

It’s hard to find someone who can structure a song as well as Kendrick Lamar. It’s hard not to appreciate his ability to organize songs so well, yet break from the normal while still being cohesive. This is one of the many attributes of Kendrick Lamar that makes him extremely exciting to listen to


I got a bone to pick
I don't want you monkey-mouth motherfuckers
Sittin' in my throne again
Ayy, ayy, nigga, what's happenin'?
K-Dot back in the hood, nigga!
I'm mad (He mad!), but I ain't stressin'
True friends, one question


Bitch, where you when I was walkin'?
Now I run the game, got the whole world talkin'
King Kunta, everybody wanna cut the legs off him
Kunta, black man taking no losses, oh yeah
Bitch, where you when I was walkin'?
Now I run the game, got the whole world talkin'
King Kunta, everybody wanna cut the legs off him
When you got the yams—(What's the yams?)


The yam is the power that be
You can smell it when I'm walkin' down the street
(Oh yes, we can, oh yes, we can)
I can dig rappin', but a rapper with a ghostwriter?
What the fuck happened? (Oh no!)
I swore I wouldn't tell, but most of y'all sharing bars
Like you got the bottom bunk in a two-man cell (A two-man cell)
Something's in the water (Something's in the water)
And if I gotta brown-nose for some gold
Then I'd rather be a bum than a motherfuckin' baller (Oh yeah!)


Bitch, where you when I was walkin'?
Now I run the game, got the whole world talkin'
King Kunta, everybody wanna cut the legs off him
King Kunta, black man taking no losses, oh yeah
Bitch, where you when I was walkin'?
Now I run the game, got the whole world talkin'
King Kunta, everybody wanna cut the legs off him
When you got the yams—(What's the yams?)


The yam brought it out of Richard Pryor
Manipulated Bill Clinton with desires
Twenty-four-seven, three-sixty-five days times two
I was contemplatin' gettin' off stage
Just to go back to the hood, see my enemy, and say… (Oh yeah)


Bitch, where you when I was walkin'?
Now I run the game, got the whole world talkin'
King Kunta, everybody wanna cut the legs off him
King Kunta, black man taking no losses, oh yeah
Bitch, where you when I was walkin'?
Now I run the game, got the whole world talkin'
King Kunta, everybody wanna cut the legs off him


You goat-mouth mammyfucker
I was gonna kill a couple rappers, but they did it to themselves
Everybody's suicidal, they ain't even need my help
This shit is elementary, I'll probably go to jail
If I shoot at your identity and bounce to the left
Stuck a flag in my city, everybody's screamin', "Compton!"
I should probably run for mayor when I'm done, to be honest
And I put that on my momma and my baby boo too
Twenty million walkin' out the court buildin', woo-woo!
Aw, yeah, fuck the judge
I made it past twenty-five, and there I was
A little nappy-headed nigga with the world behind him
Life ain't shit but a fat vagina
Screamin', "Annie, are you okay? Annie, are you okay?"
Limo tinted with the gold plates
Straight from the bottom, this the belly of the beast
From a peasant to a prince to a motherfuckin' king (Oh yeah)


Bitch, where you when I was walkin'—*Gunshot*
By the time you hear the next pop
The funk shall be within you—*Gunshot*
Now I run the game, got the whole world talkin'
King Kunta, everybody wanna cut the legs off him
King Kunta, black man taking no losses, oh yeah
Bitch, where you when I was walkin'?
Now I run the game, got the whole world talkin'
King Kunta, everybody wanna cut the legs off him


Funk, funk, funk, funk, funk, funk, funk, funk, funk, funk, funk
We want the funk
We want the funk
Now if I give you the funk, you gon' take it?
We want the funk
Now if I give you the funk, you gon' take it?
We want the funk
Now if I give you the funk, you gon' take it?
We want the funk
Do you want the funk?
We want the funk
Do you want the funk?
We want the funk
Now if I give you the funk, you gon' take it?
We want the funk


I remember you was conflicted, misusing your influence
Check, check, check, check, check
It go...


Ride to it, ride to it, 'cause you never know
When a bullet might hit and you die to it, die to it
Die to it, die to it, live your life, live it right
Be different, do different things
Don't do it like he did, 'cause he ain't what you is
But we can win, wait, let's get straight to the point


To the meaning of life, what's my purpose?
Maybe this Earth is ain't a good place to be
How far is heaven? Let's see
Is it in the clouds like they said it would be?
I wonder when I die will he give me receipts?
I wonder will the eyes of the Lord look at me?
Look at me, look at me, I'm a loser, I'm a winner
I'm good, I'm bad, I'm a Christian, I'm a sinner
I'm humble, I'm loud, I'm righteous, I'm a killer
What I'm doing, I'm saying that I'm human, now people just


Ride to it, ride to it, 'cause you never know
When a bullet might hit and you die to it, die to it
Die to it, die to it, live your life, live it right
Be different, do different things
Don't do it like he did, 'cause he ain't what you is
But we can win, wait, let's get straight to the point


It go one (one), two (two), three (three)
Two in the front, one in the back seat (seat), seat (seat), seat (seat), seat (seat)
Looking for a victim of an AK-47 100-round each, each, each
But why must we retaliate? Is it human nature?
I don't know, I look for the answers later
"Make a right, there they go!"
Sometimes gotta


Ride to it, ride to it, 'cause you never know
When a bullet might hit and you die to it, die to it
Die to it, die to it, live your life, live it right
Be different, do different things
Don't do it like he did, 'cause he ain't what you is
But we can win, wait, let's get straight to the point


As I open this book and then burn up some of this reefer
My plan is to figure out the world and escape all my demons
I'm dying inside, I wonder if Zion inside the heavens
A condom, a Rollie, pain, a fat blunt and a MAC-11
That's all I see in my life and they tell me to make it right
But I'm right on the edge of Everest and I might jump tonight
Have you ever had known a saint that was taking sinner's advice?
Well it's probably you, am I right? If I'm wrong, you a fucking liar
When I lie on my back and look at the ceiling, it's so appealing to pray
I wonder if I'm just a villain, dealing my morals away
Some people look at my face then tell me don't worry 'bout it
I give 'em back they deposit, no money, just total silence
I'm running, they say I'm wilding, a young'n with lack of guidance
That's hundreds of us with problems
Mo' money, mo' drugs and violence
Look at the soul of an out-of-control artist
That's dealing with life the hardest, that's on my life
But regardless I'ma


Ride to it, ride to it, 'cause I never know
When a bullet might hit me and I die to it, die to it
Die to it, die to it, live my life, live it right
Be different, do different things
Don't do it like he did, 'cause he ain't what I is
But we can win, wait, let's get straight to the point


Yeah, life can please you, but death can tease you
On the day Niko had that seizure
I lost one of my biggest believers, aww!
Close deaths make you think about your life
Like if I had that same chance twice, what would I do different?
I'd tell her I loved her more, do more
But tease her 'bout crying on that picture
Now when I'm done recording
Swear, I let the beat bang in her name
Make her shake her head in heaven, saying, "They at it again"
Make them clouds turn to speakers
Don't take too much smoke from the reefer
Love being in the room with her peoples
Now my love life murking it, family having surgeries
Hate it that the truth that chose for they life to be under me
Lord, what kind of life is this?
"Momma, I just wanna sing"
Momma said, "According to get everything...
You gotta risk everything"
So I'm smoking my kush, reading Corinthians
Smoking my kush, reading Corinthians
Smoking my kush, reading Corinthians
Smoking my kush, reading Corinthians
Damn, love or lust
Damn, all of us


Give me a run for my money
There is nobody, no one to outrun me
(Another world premiere)
So give me a run for my money
Sippin' bubbly, feelin’ lovely, livin' lovely
Just love me
I wanna be with you, ayy, I wanna be with
Just love me, just love me, just love
I wanna be with you, ayy, I wanna be with
Love me
I wanna be with you
Love me, just love me


If I didn't ride blade on curb, would you still love me?
If I made up my mind at work, would you still love me?
Keep it a hundred, I’d rather you trust me than to love me
Keep it a whole one hund', don't got you, I got nothin' (Uh, uh)


Ayy, I got somethin'
Hol' up, we gon' function, ayy, no assumptions, ayy
Feelin' like Tyson with it
Knock it out twice, I’m with it
Only for the night, I’m kiddin'
Only for life, yeah, only for life, yeah
Only for life, let’s get it
Hit that shoulder lean
I know what comin' over me
Backstroke oversea
I know what you need
Already on ten, all money come in
All feeling go out, this feeling don't drought
This party won't end


If I didn’t ride blade on curb, would you still love me?
If I minimized my net-worth, would you still love me?
Keep it a hundred, I'd rather you trust me than to love me
Keep it a whole one hund', don't got you, I got nothin' (Uh, uh)


Give me a run for my money
There is nobody, no one to outrun me
So give me a run for my money
Sippin' bubbly, feelin' lovely, livin' lovely
Just love me
I wanna be with you, ayy, I wanna be with
Just love me, just love me, just love
I wanna be with you, ayy, I wanna be with
Love me
I wanna be with you
Love me, just love me


I'm on the way
We ain't got no time to waste
Poppin' your gum on the way (love me)
Am I in the way?
I don't wan' pressure you none
I want your blessing today (love me)
Oh, by the way, open the door by the way
Told you that I'm on the way (love me)
I'm on the way, I know connection is vague
Pick up the phone for me, babe
Dammit, we jammin'
Bad attitude from yo' nanny
Curves and your hips from yo' mammy
Remember Gardena, I took the studio camera
I know Top will be mad at me
I had to do it, I want your body, your music
I bought the big one to prove it
Look what you made
Told you that I'm on the way
I'm like a exit away, yep


If I didn't ride blade on curb, would you still love me?
If I minimized my net-worth, would you still love me?
Keep it a hundred, I'd rather you trust me than to love me
Keep it a whole one hund', don't got you, I got nothin' (Uh, uh)


Give me a run for my money
There is nobody, no one to outrun me
So give me a run for my money
Sippin' bubbly, feelin' lovely, livin' lovely
Just love me
I wanna be with you, ayy, I wanna be with
Just love me, just love me, just love me
I wanna be with you, ayy, I wanna be with
Love me
I wanna be with you
Love me, just love me


I said I'm geeked and I’m fired up (Fired, fire)
All I want tonight is just get high (High, high, high)
Girl, you look so good, it's to die for (Die for, fire)
Ooh, that pussy good, it's to die for (I’m on fire)


It's a secret society
All we ask is trust (All we ask is trust)
All we got is us
Loyalty, loyalty, loyalty
Loyalty, loyalty, loyalty


Kung Fu Kenny now
My resume is real enough for two millennium
A better way to make a wave, stop defendin' them
I meditate and moderate all of my wins again
I'm hangin' on the fence again
I'm always on your mind
I put my lyric and my lifeline on the line
And ain't no limit when I might shine, might grind
You rollin' with it at the right time, right now
(Only for the dollar sign)


Bad girl RiRi now
Swerve, swerve, swerve, swerve, leave it now
On your pulse like it’s EDM
Gas in the bitch like it’s premium
Haul ass on a bitch all in the fast lane
Been a bad bitch way before any cash came
I'm established, hundred carats on my name
Run the atlas, I’m a natural, I'm alright


I'm a savage, I'm a asshole, I’m a king
Shimmy ya, shimmy ya, shimmy ya rah (Yeah)
You can tell your nigga he can meet me outside (Yeah)
You can babysit him when I leave him outside
Ain't no other love like the one I know
I done been down so long lost hope
I done came down so hard I slowed
Honestly forever, all a real nigga want


I said I'm geeked and I'm fired up (Fired, fire)
All I want tonight is just to get high up (Yeah)
All I want is, all I want is


Loyalty, loyalty, loyalty
Loyalty, loyalty, loyalty
10-4, no switchin' sides
Feel somethin' wrong
You actin' shifty, you don't vibe
With me no more, I need
Loyalty, loyalty, loyalty
Loyalty, loyalty, loyalty


Tell me who you loyal to
Is it money? Is it fame? Is it weed? Is it drink?
Is it comin' down with the loud pipes in the rain?
Big chillin', only for the power in your name
Tell me who you loyal to
Is it love for the streets when the lights get dark?
Is it unconditional when the 'Rari don't start?
Tell me when your loyalty is comin' from the heart


Tell me who you loyal to
Do it start with your woman or your man? (Mmm)
Do it end with your family and friends? (Mmm)
Are you loyal to yourself in advance?
I said, tell me who you loyal to
Is it anybody that you would lie for?
Anybody you would slide for?
Anybody you would die for?
That's what God for


I said I'm geeked and I'm fired up (Fired, fire)
All I want tonight is just to get high up (Yeah)
All I want is, all I want is


Loyalty, loyalty, loyalty
Loyalty, loyalty, loyalty
10-4, no switchin' sides
Feel somethin' wrong
You actin' shifty, you don't vibe
With me no more, I need
Loyalty, loyalty, loyalty
Loyalty, loyalty, loyalty


It's so hard to be humble
It's so hard to be
Lord knows I'm tryin'
Lord knows I'm dyin', baby
I need some water, somethin' came over me
Way too hot to simmer down might as well overheat
Too close to comfort, as blood rush my favorite vein
Heartbeat racin' like a junkie's, I just need you to want me
Am I askin' too much? Let me put the head in
Ooh, I don't want more than that, girl, I respect the cat
I promise just a touch, let me put the head in
If it's okay, she said, "It's okay"


Yeah, I need everybody's motherfuckin' hands up right now
I need everybody's motherfuckin'—
Door and his Nike Air Rattles
Rush the fire exit, no time for battles
Well I, I never expected
This that new shit
This that new, new shit


Wake up in the mornin', thinkin' 'bout money, kick your feet up
Watch you a comedy, take a shit, then roll some weed up
Go hit you a lick, go fuck on a bitch
Don't go to work today, cop you a fit
Or maybe some kicks and make you—
Door and his Nike Air Rattles
Rush the fire exit, no time for battles
Well I, I never expected
Wake up in the mornin', thinkin' 'bout money, kick your feet up
Watch you a comedy—hol' up!
Wake up in the mornin', thinkin' 'bout money, kick your feet up
Watch you a comedy, take a shit, then roll some weed up
Go hit you a lick, go fuck on a bitch, don't go to work today
Cop you a fit or maybe some kicks and make it work today
Hang with the homies, stunt on your baby mama
Sip some lean, go get a pistol, shoot out the window
Bet your favorite team, play you some Madden
Go to the club or your mama house
Whatever you doin', just make it count (I need some water)
Wake up in the mornin', thinkin' 'bout money, kick your feet up
Hop in the shower, put on your makeup, lace your weave up
Touch on yourself, call up your nigga, tell him he ain't shit
Credit card scam, get you a Visa, make it pay your rent
Hop on the 'Gram, flex on the bitches that be hatin' on you
Pop you a pill, call up your bitches, have 'em waitin' on you
Go to the club, have you some fun, make that ass bounce
It's whatever, just make it count


I need some water, somethin' came over me
Way too hot to simmer down might as well overheat
Too close to comfort, as blood rush my favorite vein
Heartbeat racin' like a junkie's, I just need you to want me
Am I askin' too much? Let me put the head in
Ooh, I don't want more than that, girl, I respect the cat
I promise just a touch, let me put the head in
If it's okay, she said, "It's okay"


I wake in the mornin', my head spinnin' from the last night
Both in a trance, feelings are dead—what a fast life!
Manager called, the lobby call is 11:30
Did this before, promised myself I'd be a hour early
Room full of clothes, bag full of money: call it loose change
Fumbled my jewelry, 100k, I lost a new chain
Hop on the bird, hit the next city for another M
Take me a nap then do it again
We all woke up, tryna tune to the daily news
Lookin' for confirmation, hopin' election wasn't true
All of us worried, all of us buried, and our feelings deep
None of us married to his proposal, make us feel cheap
Stale and sad, distraught and mad, tell the neighbor 'bout it
Bet they agree, parade the streets with your voice proudly
Time passin', things change
Revertin' back to our daily programs, stuck in our ways
Lust


Lately, I feel like I been lustin' over the fame
Lately, we lust on the same routine of shame
Lately, lately, lately, my lust been heightened (Lately)
Lately, it's all contradiction
Lately, I'm not here
Lately, I lust over self
Lust turn into fear
Lately, in James 4:4 says
Friend of the world is enemy of the Lord
Brace yourself, lust is all yours


I need some water, somethin' came over me
Way too hot to simmer down might as well overheat
Too close to comfort, as blood rush my favorite vein
Heartbeat racin' like a junkie's, I just need you to want me
Am I askin' too much? Let me put the head in
Ooh, I don't want more than that, girl, I respect the cat
I promise just a touch, let me put the head in
If it's okay, she said, "It's okay"
Everybody, just clap your hands if you're real
Middle finger up, give a fuck how they feel
Be yourself, just show me you're real
Middle fingers up


Just let me be me
That's the only way I know
Just let me be me
That's the only way I know
That's the only way I know how to hold it down
That's, that's the only way I know how to hold it down


I just wanna be me
No disrespect, but motherfuck you
My education stopped at a high school degree
But I can outsmart any high IQ
Draped in some fly shit, call me Jeff Goldblum
Cold, my style making my nose run
Oh, I stare at the mirror then realize, that real lies within me
Some say I'm crazy cause I think like I need a shrink
Ask too many questions about the stars and Earth shit
Rather be in the studio than out buying drinks
So if I'm not clubbing, don't think I'm on some jerk shit
And California on that jerk shit
But I'd just rather 2-step, like my first steps
Jill Scott on my iPod, as my head rests
Yes


Just let me be me
That's the only way I know
Just let me be me
That's the only way I know
That's the only way I know how to hold it down
That's, that's the only way I know how to hold it down


And yeah I know I'm from Compton, Cali
But I don't lace up Chucks or rock tan khakis
And skinny jeans ain't quite the lick
I probably would wear 'em but my dick don't fit
Ha ha ha, I like to joke, got a sense of humor?
Still face, play me short like an oompa loompa
You ain't gotta screw up your face in front of the kids
Won't you lighten up like Michael did?
I grew up with killas man, people who killed men
But my character never could be like them, man
And they respect that, say that I'm real man
Not a fake person, that's the Sims man
Live my life through some film, man
I ain't acting out shit, I be packing out shows
Cause they know that they don't know Kendrick fo' sho
And oh


Just let me be me
That's the only way I know
Just let me be me
That's the only way I know
That's the only way I know how to hold it down
That's, that's the only way I know how to hold it down


Almost lost my life to the industry
Had to look through a photobook to remember me
These label heads ain't nothing but bullshit
Have you with professional killas, chasing hits
Lying to yourself, all over an image
Making records they want, that was wrecking my brilliance
My Mama said, "Boy, that don't sound like you."
I said, "This is the sound, though."
My only excuse
Quite frankly, dusted off my shoes with my hankie
And kicked it like he skate, make these motherfuckers hate me
The reason why they hate, cause these motherfuckers ain't me
And you can underrate me, but I know what I'm worth
A diamond in God's dirt, a diamond in winter
Watch the Simpsons and eating some cereal for dinner
See I give you my life, to mix it up in a blender
To make sure that you feel me


Just let me be me
That's the only way I know
Just let me be me
That's the only way I know
That's the only way I know how to hold it down
That's, that's the only way I know how to hold it down


Kendrick Lamar, what are you trying to say?
What are you trying to accomplish Kendrick Lamar?
Kendrick Lamar. what are you trying to say?
What are you trying to accomplish Kendrick Lamar?
Kendrick Lamar, is this really you?
Is this who you are? What are you trying to say?
What are you trying to accomplish Kendrick Lamar?
Kendrick Lamar, who are you?
What are you trying to accomplish Kendrick Lamar?
Kendrick Lamar, What are you trying to say?
What are you trying to accomplish Kendrick Lamar?


I think that I finally reached the pinnacle
Of finding myself as an individual
The world is so typical
I just wanna be higher than that
I used to want to be the messiah of Rap
Infatuated with becoming a relevant star
Trying to say goodbye to the glamorous chains and cars
That I never had, but wrote it in my raps to make you mad
Vanity, they say that it can damage me
So do I really want it?
If I didn't, I guess I'm a cool cocaine connect
That means I'll be frontin'
Cooking in a laboratory, hoping I can tell a story
That the whole world can feel, like the ones that came before me
Knowing that I'm misunderstood
So I gotta get my point across like a snitch would
And I would never walk in the shadow that never was really there
Or try to fill the shoes of an invisible pair
And Dave said he proud of my newfound honesty
And all I could say is, "Will the radio care?"
Yeah, or should I say no?
Or should I just stop and come with a whole new approach?
You heard my hip-hop when I was 16 years old
Well that was me then, now I'm an adult
22, like the smallest of guns that you know
Most determined, but with the smallest of funds to show
But I'm not worried
My talent should take me places I've never been
The world should turn as soon as my records spin
I wanna be the highest, on top of all the bullshit
The negative you bring, the stress, the violence
The capital punishment, the loud police sirens
Too focused, one word, righteous
And this is Kendrick Lamar, and soon ya'll know Cloud 9, ya'll
That means I wanna be the highest
Too focused, one word, righteous
That means I wanna be the highest
Too focused, one word


Too focused, too focused, one word
Too focused, too focused, one word
Too focused, too focused, one word
Too focused, one word
Too focused, too focused, one word
I used to wanna be like Michael Jordan
Figure I would hit the NBA and make me a fortune


Uh, every time I’m in my city, I be acting like my shit don’t stink
Used to clean my Rolie chain with alcohol in the sink
Riding around with niggas that I grew up with since McNair
Bumpin' Me Against the World—hello, world, Kendrick here
And I’m too much for these niggas, I’m three much for these hoes
I’m too much for these niggas, I’m three much for these hoes
I’m too much for these niggas, I’m three much for these hoes
Wayne told me that and that's just how it goes


Michael Jordan
Bounce-bounce ho, bounce-bounce


This shit make a nigga wanna get some bread or bust a head
Or fuck my enemy's bitch, acting bad and getting rich
Pull up on these 26’s, I’m a vanity slave
I’m a sinner, Jesus Christ, please forgive me for my ways
I don’t know why your bitch want to fuck me
And I don’t know why you fuck niggas can’t see
I’m a Comp-town representer, a concrete back-flipper
A.K.A that nigga, don't wuwwy!
I don’t know why your bitch want to fuck me
And I don’t know why you fuck niggas can’t see
This is HiiiPower, since the Eddie Bauer I been popular
I’m popping now, every other hour paparazzi come
You jocking her, let her be a ho, why you stopping though?
We stopping the traffic, what you know 'bout them hockey pucks?
Skating on 'em, why you hating on 'em? You should learn from 'em
Seen too many of y’all getting money, know my turn coming
I don’t know why your bitch wanna fuck me
I don’t know why (Hey, wait a minute, motherfucker)


Every time I’m in my city, I be feeling like my shit don’t stink
Used to clean my Rollie chain with alcohol in the sink
Ridin' 'round with niggas that I grew up with since McNair
Bumpin' "Me Against the World," hello, world, Kendrick here
And I’m too much for these niggas, I’m three much for these hoes
I’m too much for these niggas, I’m three much for these hoes
I’m too much for these niggas, I’m three much for these hoes
Wayne told me that and that's just how it goes
Michael Jordan bitch, Michael Jordan bitch, Michael Jordan bitch
Michael Jordan bitch, that means I’m too much for these niggas
I’m three much for these hoes
Wayne told me that and that's just how it goes


Man, the game chose me, what am I to do?
The only thing I did wrong was make it possible
I diddy bop and make them titties pop
Out there on my bumper like a city cop
Walking out the Fred Segal, put my girl on it
Ass so fat, probably sit the world on it (Aye)
Pussy crazy, pussy crazy
You fuck niggas, you pussies crazy
Man, I know I can’t tell you about the world homie
But I know I can tell you about your girl homie
Her pussy crazy, her pussy crazy, I fuck nigga, I know you hate me
I know they pay me too much of attention
Bring my name up, it gotta be mentioned
I need me an engine that go real fast
Call it hall of fame once it haul ass
Give me tall glass, Coconut Cîroc
Please, no soda pop, I make my solo pop
Life’s a bitch, her pussy crazy
But I make that pussy pay me


Every time I’m in my city, I be feeling like my shit don’t stink
Used to clean my Rolie chain with alcohol in the sink
Riding around with niggas that I grew up with since McNair
Bumpin' "Me Against the World," hello, world, Kendrick here
And I’m too much for these niggas, I’m three much for these hoes
I’m too much for these niggas, I’m three much for these hoes
I’m too much for these niggas, I’m three much for these hoes
Wayne told me that and that's just how it goes
Michael Jordan bitch, Michael Jordan bitch, Michael Jordan bitch
Michael Jordan bitch, that means I’m too much for these niggas
I’m three much for these hoes, Wayne told me that…


I remember tripping, walking through the set
Like my Glock don’t think
Grandma in the kitchen, neck bones in the sink
I don’t know why your bitch want to fuck me
And I don’t know why you sucker niggas can’t see
I’m from Hoover man, high as Superman, shit you Lois Lane
You pussy man with the pussy game, shit, we off the chain
We popping the fortune, not the fame, shit, you backwards, man
You chasing hoes, we replacing those, bag and pass them hoes
Your broad done chose, guess she moving on, yep, we do it wrong
We fucked her homes, fucked and sent her home, marijuana strong
You know I’m gon' turn my swagger on, am I swagged enough?
My paper long, yep, you left alone, y-y-you gets no fucks
Leaning off the Actavis, passing blunts round and round
Told me Mary was a go so we passed her round and round
Your bitch texted me, wants it now so I had to knock her down
Hurt her bouncing off my balls, slinging dick up from the mouth
You let it slide, I hit home-runs, clean her dugout till I’m done
I can be her number two and you can be her number one
Her pussy’ crazy, her pussy crazy, you fuck niggas


Every time I’m in my city, I be feeling like my shit don’t stink
Used to clean my Rolie chain with alcohol in the sink
Riding around with niggas that I grew up with since McNair
Bumpin' "Me Against the World," hello, world, Kendrick here
And I’m too much for these niggas, I’m three much for these hoes
I’m too much for these niggas, I’m three much for these hoes
I’m too much for these niggas, I’m three much for these hoes
Wayne told me that and that's just how it goes
Michael Jordan bitch, Michael Jordan bitch, Michael Jordan bitch
Michael Jordan bitch, that means I’m too much for these niggas
I’m three much for these hoes
Wayne told me that and that's just how it goes




Oh shit! I need that
I need that sloppy, that sloppy
Like a Chevy in quicksand
Yeah, that sloppy


This feelin' is unmatched
This feelin' is brought to you by adrenaline and good rap
Black Pendleton ball cap (West, west, west)
We don't share the same synonym, fall back (West, west, west)
Been in it before internet had new acts
Mimicking radio's nemesis made me wack
My innocence limited, the experience lacked
Ten of us with no tentative tactic that cracked
The mind of a literate writer, but I did it in fact
You admitted it once I submitted it wrapped in plastic
Remember scribblin', scratchin' diligent sentences backwards
Visiting freestyle cyphers for your reaction
Now I can live in a stadium, pack it the fastest
Gamblin' Benjamin benefits, sinnin' in traffic
Spinnin' women in cartwheels, linen fabric on fashion
Winnin' in every decision
Kendrick is master that mastered it
Isn't it lovely how menaces turned attraction?
Pivotin' rappers, finish your fraction while writing blue magic
Thank God for rap, I would say it got me a plaque
But what's better than that?
The fact it brought me back home


We been waitin' for you
Waitin' for you
Waitin' for you
Waitin' for you


I know everything
I know everything, know myself
I know morality, spirituality, good and bad health
I know fatality might haunt you
I know everything, I know Compton
I know street shit, I know shit that's conscious
I know everything, I know lawyers, advertisement, their sponsors
I know wisdom, I know bad religion, I know good karma
I know everything, I know history
I know the universe works mentally
I know the perks of bullshit isn't meant for me
I know everything, I know cars, clothes, hoes, and money
I know loyalty, I know respect, I know those that's ornery
I know everything, the highs, the lows, the groupies, the junkies
I know if I'm generous at heart, I don't need recognition
The way I'm rewarded, well, that's God's decision
I know you know that line's for Compton School District
Just give it to the kids, don’t gossip 'bout how it was distributed
I know how people work
I know the price of life, I'm knowin' how much it’s worth
I know what I know and I know it well not to ever forget
Until I realized I didn’t know shit
The day I came home


We been waitin' for you
Waitin' for you
Waitin' for you
Waitin' for you


I met a little boy that resembled my features
Nappy afro, gap in his smile
Hand-me-down sneakers bounced through the crowd
Run a number on man and woman that crossed him
Sun beamin' on his beady beads, exhausted
Tossin' footballs with his ashy black ankles
Breakin' new laws mama passed on home trainin'
He looked at me and said, "Kendrick, you do know my language
You just forgot because of what public schools had painted
Oh, I forgot, 'Don't Kill My Vibe', that's right, you're famous
I used to watch on Channel 5, TV was taken
But never mind, you're here right now, don't you mistake it
It's just a new trip, take a glimpse of your family's ancestor
Make a new list of everything you thought was progress
And that was bullshit
I know your life is full of turmoil
Spoiled by fantasies of who you are, I feel bad for you
I can attempt to enlighten you without frightenin' you
If you resist, I'll back off quick, go catch a flight or two
But if you pick destiny over rest in peace
Then be an advocate, tell your homies especially
To come back home"




This is a world premiere
This is a world premiere
This is a world premiere


I been lookin' for you my whole life, an appetite
For the feeling I can barely describe, where you reside?
Is it in a woman, is it in money or mankind?
Tell me something, got me losing my mind, ah!


You make me wanna jump
Jump, jump, jump, jump
Let's talk about love
Jump, jump, jump, jump
Let's talk about love
Jump, jump, jump, jump
Let's talk about love
Jump, jump, jump, jump
Let's talk about love


I been lookin' for you my whole life, an appetite
For the feeling I can barely describe, where you reside?
Is it in a woman, is it in money, or mankind?
Tell me something, think I'm losing my mind, ah!


I say, where you at? From the front to the back
I'm lookin' for you, I react only when you react
Ah, I thought I found you, back in the ghetto
When I was seventeen with the .38 Special
Maybe you're in a dollar bill, maybe you're not real
Maybe only the wealthy get to know how you feel
Maybe I'm paranoid, ha, maybe I don't need you anyway
Don't lie to me, I'm suicidal anyway
I can be your advocate
I can preach for you if you tell me what the matter is


Uh, me and my niggas tryna get it, ya bish (Ya bish)
Hit the house lick: tell me, is you wit' it, ya bish? (Ya bish)
Home invasion was persuasive (Was persuasive)
From nine to five I know it's vacant, ya bish (Ya bish)
Dreams of livin' life like rappers do (Like rappers do)
Back when condom wrappers wasn't cool (They wasn't cool)
I fucked Sherane and went to tell my bros (Tell my bros)
Then Usher Raymond "Let It Burn" came on ("Let Burn" came on)
Hot sauce all in our Top Ramen, ya bish (Ya bish)
Park the car, then we start rhymin', ya bish (Ya bish)
The only thing we had to free our mind (Free our mind)
Then freeze that verse when we see dollar signs (See dollar signs)
You lookin' like a easy come-up, ya bish (Ya bish)
A silver spoon I know you come from, ya bish (Ya bish)
And that's a lifestyle that we never knew (We never knew)
Go at a reverend for the revenue


It go Halle Berry or hallelujah
Pick your poison, tell me what you doin'
Everybody gon' respect the shooter
But the one in front of the gun lives forever
(The one in front of the gun, forever)
And I been hustlin' all day
This-a-way, that-a-way
Through canals and alleyways, just to say
Money trees is the perfect place for shade
And that's just how I feel


Nah, nah
A dollar might just fuck your main bitch
That's just how I feel, nah
A dollar might say fuck them niggas that you came with
That's just how I feel, nah, nah
A dollar might just make that lane switch
That's just how I feel, nah
A dollar might turn to a million and we all rich
That's just how I feel


Dreams of livin' life like rappers do (Like rappers do)
Bump that new E-40 after school (Way after school)
You know, “Big Ballin' With My Homies” (My homies)
Earl Stevens had us thinkin' rational (Thinkin' rational)(That's rational)
Back to reality, we poor, ya bish (Ya bish)
Another casualty at war, ya bish (Ya bish)
Two bullets in my Uncle Tony head (My Tony head)
He said one day I'll be on tour, ya bish (Ya bish)
That Louis Burgers never be the same (Won't be the same)
A Louis belt will never ease that pain (Won't ease that pain)
But I'ma purchase when that day is jerkin' (That day is jerkin')
Pull off at Church's, with Pirellis skirtin' (Pirellis skirtin')
Gang signs out the window, ya bish (Ya bish)
Hopin' all of 'em offend you, ya bish (Ya bish)
They say your hood is a pot of gold (A pot of gold)
And we gon' crash it when nobody's home


It go Halle Berry or hallelujah
Pick your poison, tell me what you doin'
Everybody gon' respect the shooter
But the one in front of the gun lives forever
(The one in front of the gun, forever)
And I been hustlin' all day
This-a-way, that-a-way
Through canals and alleyways, just to say
Money trees is the perfect place for shade
And that's just how I feel


Nah, nah
A dollar might just fuck your main bitch
That's just how I feel, nah
A dollar might say fuck them niggas that you came with
That's just how I feel, nah, nah
A dollar might just make that lane switch
That's just how I feel, nah
A dollar might turn to a million and we all rich
That's just how I feel


Be the last one out to get this dough? No way!
Love one of you bucket-headed hoes? No way!
Hit the streets, then we break the code? No way!
Hit the brakes when they on patrol? No way!
Be the last one out to get this dough? No way!
Love one of you bucket-headed hoes? No way!
Hit the streets, then we break the code? No way!
Hit the brakes when they on patrol? No way!


Imagine Rock up in them projects
Where them niggas pick your pockets
Santa Claus don't miss them stockings
Liquors spillin', pistols poppin'
Bakin' soda YOLA whippin'
Ain't no turkey on Thanksgivin'
My homeboy just dome'd a nigga
I just hope the Lord forgive him
Pots with cocaine residue
Every day I'm hustlin'
What else is a thug to do
When you eatin' cheese from the government?
Gotta provide for my daughter n'em
Get the fuck up out my way, bish
Got that drum and I got them bands
Just like a parade, bish
Drop that work up in the bushes
Hope them boys don't see my stash
If they do, tell the truth
This the last time you might see my ass
From the gardens where the grass ain't cut
Them serpents lurkin', Blood
Bitches sellin' pussy, niggas sellin' drugs
But it's all good
Broken promises, steal your watch
And tell you what time it is
Take your J's and tell you to kick it where a FootLocker is
In the streets with a heater under my Dungarees
Dreams of me gettin' shaded under a money tree


It go Halle Berry or hallelujah
Pick your poison, tell me what you doin'
Everybody gon' respect the shooter
But the one in front of the gun lives forever
(The one in front of the gun, forever)
And I been hustlin' all day
This-a-way, that-a-way
Through canals and alleyways, just to say
Money trees is the perfect place for shade
And that's just how I feel


K’s Mom: Kendrick, just bring my car back, man. I called in for another appointment. I figured you weren’t gonna be back here on time anyways. Look, shit, shit, I just wanna get out the house, man. This man is on one, he feelin' good as a motherfucker. Shit, I’m tryna get my thing goin', too. Just bring my car back. Shit, he faded. He feelin' good. Look, listen to him!
K’s Dad: Girl, girl, I want your body, I want your body, 'cause of that big ol’ fat ass. Girl, girl, I want your body, I want your body, 'cause of that big ol’ fat ass
K’s Mom: See, he high as hell. Shit, and he ain’t even trippin' off them damn dominoes anymore. Just bring the car back!
K’s Dad: Did somebody say dominoes?
Ohhh, ohhhh, woahhh
Uh, yeah
Uh, yeah
Uh
Yeah, uh


The ghost of Mandela, hope my flows stay propellin'
Let these words be your Earth and moon, you consume every message
As I lead this army, make room for mistakes and depression
And with that being said, my nigga, let me ask this question:


When shit hit the fan, is you still a fan?
When shit hit the fan—
(one two, one two)
When shit hit the fan, is you still a fan?
When shit hit the fan, is you still a fan?


The ghost of Mandela, hope my flows stay propellin'
Let these words be your Earth and moon, you consume every message
As I lead this army, make room for mistakes and depression
And with that being said, my nigga, let me ask this question:


When shit hit the fan, is you still a fan?
When shit hit the fan, is you still a fan?
Won't you look to your left and right? Make sure you ask your friends
When shit hit the fan, is you still a fan?


Do you believe in me? Are you deceiving me?
Could I let you down easily, is your heart where it need to be?
Is your smile on permanent? Is your vow on lifetime?
Would you know where the sermon is if I died in this next line?
If I’m tried in a court of law, if the industry cut me off
If the government want me dead, plant cocaine in my car
Would you judge me a drug-head or see me as K. Lamar?
Or question my character and degrade me on every blog?
Want you to love me like Nelson, want you to hug me like Nelson
I freed you from being a slave in your mind, you’re very welcome
You tell me my song is more than a song, it’s surely a blessing
But a prophet ain’t a prophet til they ask you this question:


When shit hit the fan, is you still a fan?
When shit hit the fan, is you still a fan?
Won't you look to your left and right? Make sure you ask your friends
When shit hit the fan, is you still a fan?


The ghost of Mandela, hope my flows stay propellin'
Let my words be your Earth and moon, you consume every message
As I lead this army, make room for mistakes and depression
And with that—


Do you believe in me? How much you believe in her?
You think she gon’ stick around if them 25 years occur?
You think he can hold you down when you down behind bars, hurt?
You think y’all on common ground if you promise to be the first? Can you be immortalized without your life being expired?
Even though you share the same blood, is it worth the time?
Like, who got your best interest?
Like, how much are you dependent?
How clutch are the people that say they love you?
And who pretending?
How tough is your skin when they turn you in?
Do you show forgiveness?
What brush do you bend when dusting your shoulders from being offended?
What kind of den did they put you in when the lions start hissing?
What kind of bridge did they burn?
Revenge on your mind when it’s mentioned
You wanna love like Nelson, you wanna be like Nelson
You wanna walk in his shoes, but your peacemaking seldom
You wanna be remembered that delivered the message
That considered the blessing of everyone
This your lesson for everyone, say;


When shit hit the fan, is you still a fan?
When shit hit the fan, is you still a fan?
Won't you look to your left and right? Make sure you ask your friends
When shit hit the fan, is you still a fan?


The voice of Mandela, hope this flow stay propellin'
Let my word be your Earth and moon, you consume every message
As I lead this army, make room for mistakes and depression
And if you riding with me, nigga—


I been wrote off before, I got abandonment issues
I hold grudges like bad judges, don’t let me resent you
That’s not Nelson-like—want you to love me like Nelson
I went to Robben’s Island analysing; that’s where his cell is
So I could find clarity—like, how much you cherish me?
Is this relationship a fake, or real as the heavens be?
See I got to question it all; family, friends, fans, cats, dogs
Trees, plants, grass, how the wind blow, Murphy’s Law
Generation X—will I ever be your ex?
Flaws of a baby step', mauled by the mouth a bit—pause
Put me under stress, crawled under rocks, duckin' y’all
It’s respect—but then tomorrow, put my back against the wall
How many leaders you said you needed then left ‘em for dead?
Is it Moses? Is it Huey Newton or Detroit Red?
Is it Martin Luther? JFK? Shooter—you assassin
Is it Jackie? Is it Jesse? Oh, I know it’s Michael Jackson—oh


When shit hit the fan, is you still a fan?
When shit hit the fan, is you still a fan?
That nigga gave us "Billie Jean," you say he touched those kids?
When shit hit the fan, is you still a fan?


The ghost of Mandela, hope my flows stay propelling
Let my word be your Earth and moon, you consume every message
As I lead this army, make room for mistakes and depression
And if you riding with me, nigga, let me ask this question, nigga


"I remember you was conflicted
Misusing your influence
Sometimes I did the same
Abusing my power, full of resentment
Resentment that turned into a deep depression
Found myself screaming in the hotel room
I didn’t wanna self destruct
The evils of Lucy was all around me
So I went running for answers
Until I came home
But that didn’t stop survivor’s guilt
Going back and forth trying to convince myself the stripes I earned
Or maybe how A-1 my foundation was
But while my loved ones was fighting the continuous war back in the city
I was entering a new one
A war that was based on apartheid and discrimination
Made me wanna go back to the city and tell the homies what I learned
The word was respect
Just because you wore a different gang color than mine's
Doesn’t mean I can’t respect you as a black man
Forgetting all the pain and hurt we caused each other in these streets
If I respect you, we unify and stop the enemy from killing us
But I don’t know, I’m no mortal man
Maybe I’m just another nigga”

Shit and that’s all I wrote
I was gonna call it "Another Nigga" but, it ain’t really a poem
I just felt like it’s something you probably could relate to
Other than that, now that I finally got a chance to holla at you
I always wanted to ask you about a certain situa-
About a metaphor actually, uh, you spoke on the ground
What you mean by that, what the ground represent?

The ground is gonna open up and swallow the evil
Right
That’s how I see it, my word is bond
I see—and the ground is the symbol for the poor people
Right
The poor people is gonna open up this whole world
And swallow up the rich people
'Cause the rich people gonna be so fat
And they gonna be so appetizing, you know what I’m saying Wealthy, appetizing
The poor gonna be so poor, and hungry
Right
You know what I’m saying, it’s gonna be like
You know what I'm saying, it's gonna be...
There might, there might be some cannibalism out this muh-fu-
They might eat the rich, you know what I'm saying?

Aight so let me ask you this then
Do you see yourself as somebody that’s rich
Or somebody that made the best of they own opportunities?

I see myself as a natural born hustler
A true hustler in every sense of the word
I took nothin’, I took the opportunities
I worked at the most menial and degrading job
And built myself up so I could get it to where I owned it
I went from having somebody managing me
To me hiring the person that works my management company
I changed everything, I realized my destiny
In a matter of five years, you know what I’m saying?
I made myself a millionaire, I made millions for a lot of people
Now it’s time to make millions for myself, you know what I’m saying?
I made millions for the record companies
I made millions for these movie companies
Now I make millions for, for us

And through your different avenues of success
How would you say you managed to keep a level of sanity?

By my faith in God, by my faith in the game
And by my faith in "all good things come to those that stay true"
Right
You know what I’m saying?
And it was happening to me for a reason
You know what I’m saying, I was noticing, shit
I was punching the right buttons and it was happening
So it’s no problem, you know
I mean, it’s a problem but I’m not finna let them know
I’m finna go straight through

Would you consider yourself a fighter at heart or somebody that
Somebody that only reacts when they back is against the wall?

Shit, I like to think that at every opportunity I’ve ever been, uh Threatened with resistance, it’s been met with resistance
And not only me but, it goes down my family tree
You know what I’m saying, it’s in my veins to fight back

Aight well, how long will you think it take before niggas be like
"We fighting a war, I’m fighting a war I can’t win
And I wanna lay it all down"

In this country, a black man only have like
5 years we can exhibit maximum strength
And that’s right now while you a teenager, while you still strong
While you still wanna lift weights, while you still wanna shoot back
'Cause once you turn 30 it’s like
They take the heart and soul out of a man
Out of a black man, in this country
And you don’t wanna fight no more
And if you don’t believe me, you can look around
You don’t see no loud mouth 30-year old motherfuckers

That’s crazy, because me being one of your offsprings
Of the legacy you left behind, I can truly tell you that
There’s nothing but turmoil goin’ on so, I wanted to ask you
What you think is the future for me and my generation today?

I think that niggas is tired of grabbin' shit out the stores
And next time it's a riot it's gonna be like, uh, bloodshed
For real, I don’t think America know that
I think America think we was just playing
And it’s gonna be some more playing but
It ain’t gonna be no playing
It’s gonna be murder, you know what I’m saying?
It’s gonna be like Nat Turner, 1831, up in this motherfucker
You know what I’m saying, it’s gonna happen

That’s crazy, man, in my opinion
Only hope that we kinda have left is music and vibrations
Lot a people don’t understand how important it is, you know
Sometimes I can like, get behind a mic
And I don’t know what type of energy I’ma push out
Or where it comes from, trip me out sometimes

Because it's spirits, we ain’t even really rappin’
We just letting our dead homies tell stories for us
Damn

I wanted to read one last thing to you
It’s actually something a good friend had wrote
Describing my world, it says:
“The caterpillar is a prisoner to the streets that conceived it
Its only job is to eat or consume everything around it
In order to protect itself from this mad city
While consuming its environment
The caterpillar begins to notice ways to survive
One thing it noticed is how much the world shuns him
But praises the butterfly
The butterfly represents the talent, the thoughtfulness
And the beauty within the caterpillar
But having a harsh outlook on life
The caterpillar sees the butterfly as weak
And figures out a way to pimp it to his own benefits
Already surrounded by this mad city
The caterpillar goes to work on the cocoon
Which institutionalizes him
He can no longer see past his own thoughts
He’s trapped
When trapped inside these walls certain ideas take root, such as
Going home, and bringing back new concepts to this mad city
The result?
Wings begin to emerge, breaking the cycle of feeling stagnant
Finally free, the butterfly sheds light on situations
That the caterpillar never considered, ending the internal struggle
Although the butterfly and caterpillar are completely different
They are one and the same"
What’s your perspective on that?
Pac? Pac? Pac?!


I remember, uhh
When my uncles
Served smokers
On Alondra
In front of our building, they was my heroes


This shit is so dope, you might wanna be my crack hoe
This shit is so dope, you might wanna be my crack hoe
Bad bitches, crackheads, street niggas, crack hoes
This shit is so dope, you might wanna be my crack hoe


Uhh, and that's scary to me
Dope beat, dope flow, vary to me
Especially when Sounwave is on his P's
Nigga cue me in I'm a Peruvian drug lord
Don't fast forward, I'ma serve you some keys
This is crack co-caine, I'm Kurt Co-bain
And I bang like a C-R-I-P
P-I-R-U, high you I'm a I-V
This shit is so dope, you might wanna be my crack— STOP
I said a I-V cuz when I be in the studio, I shot
A needle in your veins, take it in vein
Or itch till your eyeballs pop
I'm cold on the cold turkey
I hate chickens but I do fuck pretty birdies
Where your girl at? Over the Pyrex, where my world at


This shit is so dope, you might wanna be my crack hoe
This shit is so dope, you might wanna be my crack hoe
Bad bitches, crackheads, street niggas, crack hoes
This shit is so dope, you might wanna be my crack hoe


Uhh, and it's scary to me
Every listener is a strawberry to me
You pussies ain't shit but venereal disease
Z's on K.Dot? Uh-uh better wake up
A nightmare, I'm right there like a Siamese
-Twin, when, you mothafuckas gon' learn?
Curl up like Big Worm when I drop
Who fly? I'm a red eye with eye drops
I Big, I Pac, you Chris, I Rock
That's Pookie on New Jack head first with a cyclops
I'm the first one to do that I bet you never knew that
Back like a tailbone, who you got to tell on?
If ain’t about me about ho it be about face
If you ain’t on higher—learning
There's soda in the pot and the fire—burning


This shit is so dope, you might wanna be my crack hoe
This shit is so dope, you might wanna be my crack hoe
Bad bitches, crackheads, street niggas, crack hoes
This shit is so dope, you might wanna be my crack hoe


Uhh, and it's scary to carry
A smooth type flow like a drink of Merlot
That'll freak y'all out like a girl Virgo
When I turbo on any track, it's a Reynold's wrap
And I rap like a nigga who invented rap
Rapping heat, you can fall to defeat
If you don't pay ya tolls like the limbs on ya feet
I suppose this is bigger than life
This is probably everybody, Illuminati
Guess I'm the blood sacrifice of the party
I undress her like a Harley
Lights will flash, cars will crash
Smoke more junk while the junkies laugh
So my bad if I put you in rehab
You are reimbursed, put it on my tab


This shit is so dope, you might wanna be my crack hoe
This shit is so dope, you might wanna be my crack hoe
Bad bitches, crackheads, street niggas, crack hoes
This shit is so dope, you might wanna be my crack hoe


Aw dude, you're about to fuckin' OD bro


I love the way you put it on your eyes
The roses on your face light up the sky
Those lips are colorful all of the time
And girl, that's fine, but I wanna know do you mind
No make-up today, no make-up today
No make-up today, no make-up to...
And girl, that's fine, but I wanna know do you mind


I know she 'bout to ask me how she look
I tell her beautiful, and how long it took
For you to put it on, it was early in the morn'
She resembled a model out of a Mac book
Concentrating on the way the eyeliner thickens
I stand behind her and try to figure her vision
Of prettiness, the wittiness, of colors on her skin tone
Her complexion in a direction I've outgrown
Damn girl, why so much?
You 'bout to blow your cover when you cover up
Don't you know your imperfections is a wonderful blessing
From heaven, is where you got it from
I love your smile, you can do it without style
From your lips, all the way to your eyebrows
It's the beauty in her but when the make-up occur
I don't see it, all I see is a blur


I love the way you put it on your eyes
The roses on your face light up the sky
Those lips are colorful all of the time
And girl, that's fine, but I wanna know do you mind
No make-up today, no make-up today
No make-up today, no make-up to...
And girl, that's fine, but I wanna know do you mind


I know she 'bout to ask me how she look
I tell her beautiful, and how long it took
For you to put it on, it was early in the morn'
She resembled a model out of a Mac book
Concentrating on the way my eyeliner thickens
He stand behind me and try to figure her vision
Of prettiness, the wittiness of colors on my skin tone
My complexion in a direction I've outgrown
I feel like it's not enough
I can never put on too much make-up
Yeah, I know your imperfections I be constantly stressing
From him is where I get it from, they tell me I need to
Smile at least once in a while
I hate my lips, my nose, my eyebrows
It's the beauty in me, but what he don't see
Is that I had a black ey- To be continued... 11


Ladies and gentlemen
And you ain't gotta get drunk to have fun
You ain't gotta get drunk to have fun
You ain't gotta get drunk to have fun


I love the way you put it on your eyes
The roses on your face light up the sky
Those lips are colorful all of the time
And girl, that's fine, but I wanna know do you mind
No make-up today, no make-up today
No make-up today, no make-up to...
That's fine, but I wanna know do you mind


Ladies and gentlemen
And you ain't gotta get drunk to have fun
You ain't gotta get drunk to have fun
You ain't gotta get drunk to have fun


I love the way you put it on your eyes
The roses on your face light up the sky
Those lips are colorful all of the time
And girl, that's fine, but I wanna know do you mind
No make-up today, no make-up today
No make-up today, no make-up to...
That's fine, but I wanna know do you mind


We on?
Aight
1,2,3, go!


Waking up in a dream
Sleepwalking on another big stage
You never heard peace 'til you hear people scream
Your name in unison, I'm so far away
From the place I used to be, struggling usually
Look at the newer me, fate pursuing me
I can feel the energy in the air
It feel like I'm supposed to be here


Everywhere I go I'm getting so much love
Fans, the stars, everyone
Sayin how they can't wait for the LP
And I'm gonna blow
They believe in me
Feel so good in what you do
Helps somebody else get through
That's why I do the best I can
Because I know how blessed I am


I'm so high I can touch the sky
I know it's my time
And it's now or never
I shine so bright I light the night
And it feels so right, ain't nothing better


A fool if I take it all for granted
A smart man if I keep my feet planted
To the earth 'cause the people that hurt can understand it
You speakin' outlandish
I'mma show you how to make it all work
Another planet, it's a short term goal for me
A record sold for me
It's just more of me in your ear
For you to hear Kendrick persevere
Defenses I feel relentless
Ambition with a clear vision
Takin' off I ain't takin off these Pistons
I'm takin' off on the inner me - you're distance
Came across me, how much it'a cost me
To get you out my business
I said a planet is a short term goal, no sky is the limit
I'm past that, now pass that
Award, not one but four
Times two plus yours


I see myself performing there, (K.dot)
Sold out shows where the room is packed
Sitting at the Grammy's winning five awards
See myself on big billboards
Traveling around the world with endorsement deals
Can't imagine how it feels
That's why I'm smiling everyday
Because my dream ain't far away


I'm so high I can touch the sky
I know it's my time
And it's now or never
I shine so bright I light the night
And it feels so right, ain't nothing better


You looking at me and you tell me I'm blessed
Calculated my steps, my heart, my breath
Breathe in lungs of a victory and vividly
You see me when at my best, my worst
This verse dedicated to the days that I slept
With a curse research my paid dues I'm reimbursed
I burst in the crowd with a voice and a crown
I'm a King on the prowl and I see mama smile?
And I vow on the tape that I'll never break
You can break bread with me now
We can all take a bow on the edge of the pedestal
Then scream out loud that we made it off the avenue
And walked that mile
In the darkness I often sit back
And get lost in the rap that I wrote
When you told me that it spoke to your soul
I was talking to you
I was walking it through every ghetto
Tell success hello
We here


And I'm so happy I cry
Cause I can't believe
All the things I ever wanted
Are finally happening for me
And it's so surreal
That I almost feel
That any minute I can wake up
From this fantasy
When you pray so hard
And you've come so far
And you know that it's the time for you to lift your bar
And I'm gonna do it
Watch me!


I'm so high I can touch the sky
I know it's my time
And it's now or never
I shine so bright I light the night
And it feels so right, ain't nothing better
I'm so high I can touch the sky
I know it's my time
And it's now or never
I shine so bright I light the night
And it feels so right, ain't nothing better


We hurt people that love us, love people that hurt us
Hurt people that love us, love people
I'm inspired, so get inspired


And so he said "Why you gotta be so kind-hearted?
Why you couldn't be a con artist? Why you couldn't?
Why you couldn't be mischievous or just a lil' devious
The moment that we first started?
Why you never ask for nothing, just a lil' time?
Why you let me use yours cus I don't got mine?
Why you always lift me up, when I'm completely giving up
Or when niggas holla, "What's up?" you give a dry response?
Why you giving me your last knowing you ain't got it?
Why you always buy me something when you going shopping?
Why you tell me that you love me, Why you always thinking of me
Want my company rather than going club hopping?
Why you treating my momma like she your momma too?
Why you making promises that you'll forever do?
Whatever just to make me happy, wanting us to have a family
These are exactly the reasons why I cheat on you" (Sometimes)


We hurt people that love us, love people that hurt us
We hurt people that love us, love people that hurt us
We hurt people that love us, love people that hurt us
We hurt people that love us, love people that hurt us


Sometimes I, sometimes I feel we share
Nothing in common, it ain't fair
But where do we seem to fall
Where do we seem to fall
Tender love and care, once upon a time
Once upon a time, we was there


And so she said "Why you gotta be so mean to me?
Why you don't know what you mean to me?
Why you always playing games? Why I feel like you ashamed
Out in public curse me out and make a scenery?
Why you got other bitches rolling their eyes at me?
Why text messages popping up saying, "Hi, Daddy"?
Why you treat me like I'm nothing? Why you always at a function?
I be wanting to go out but you don’t ever ask me
Why you slip and say her name when we having sex?
Why you always assuming that I still like my ex?
Every time we get into it, I'm the one that's feeling stupid
You don't need me, you gon' leave me, that's ya favorite threat
Why you never know how it feel to be lonely?
Why I feel I'm the last option after ya homies?
Why you always gotta know that I will never let you go
Even tho you get violent and put your hands on me?" (Sometimes)


We hurt people that love us, love people that hurt us
We hurt people that love us, love people that hurt us
We hurt people that love us, love people that hurt us
We hurt people that love us, love people that hurt us


Sometimes I, sometimes I feel we share
Nothing in common, it ain't fair
But where do we seem to fall
Where do we seem to fall
Tender love and care, once upon a time
Once upon a time, we was there


She says she loves me
She says she loves me
So she clings to me, even when I want to be left alone
But she's beautiful
Like, sometimes, when I have things on my mind, she's the perfect person to listen
And she only gives advice, she says, when I give her a cue
She says she loves me
Like when I wake up in the morning, she's sitting on the edge of the bed with a plate of food, wanting to feed me
She says she needs me
She says she loves me
Or like when I'm stepping out of the shower, she's standing there with the towel, wanting to, wanting to dry me off
She says, she says she loves me
So instead of admitting that she has made another mistake
She says she loves me... and I don't know about loveBeyonce - "Freedom"
Fugees - "Ready or Not"
SZA - "Babylon"
Anderson Paak - "The Dreamer"
Yuna (ft. Usher) - "Crush"
Kanye West - "Ultralight Beam"
Chance the Rapper - "Blessings"
J. Cole - "Love Yourz"
Puff Daddy & Faith Hill - I'll Be Missing You
Kendrick Lamar (ft. Drake) - "Poetic Justice"
Kendrick Lamar - "i"
J. Cole - "No Role Modelz"
Donny Hathaway - "We're Still Friends"
D'Angelo and The Vanguard - "Really Love"
Bryson Tiller - "For However Long"
ABRA - "Roses"
The Roots - "The Fire"
R. Kelly - "The World's Greatest"
Mos Def - "Mathematics"
Kanye West - "I'll Fly Way"
August Alsina - "Song Cry"
Kendrick Lamar - "untitled 04 l 08.14.2014."
The Jimi Hendrix Experience - "Bold As Love"
Roy Ayers Ubiquity - "Everybody Loves the Sunshine"




"Gina, baby, I don't have no money, I don't have no ends
Gina, I'm ass-out"
"I'm going through something right now!"
"I done told you that"


Oh, what up ho? Oh, what up?
I said, oh, what up ho? Oh, what up?
I said, oh, what up ho? Oh, what up?
Well alright...


I'm going through something with life
But pussy and Patrón make you feel alright
Pussy and Patrón make you feel alright
Pussy and Patrón, that's some great advice
I'm going through something with life
But pussy and Patrón make you feel alright
Pussy and Patrón make you feel alright
Pussy and Patrón, that's some great advice


Welcome to my diary, stressing got me gray hairs
Something to inspire me, rather than society's
Woes, let me go, let me shine a lil' bit love
I want diamonds too, Ronnie on Player's Club
I used to have a 9 to 5, fresh out of school that was '05
That bitch was racist, got me fired, ever since then, I had no job
Pushing in my momma van, stop for gas on Rosecrans
Trust me these niggas rushed me for somethin my cousin prolly did
Guilty by association: story of my life, nigga
You gon make me flip and split yo shit, judge give me life, nigga
Pain since my grandma's death, Uncle killed at Louie's Burgers
Hold my tears I tried my best, let it go, drenched my pullover
Cycles of a starving artist tryna go beyond the margin, margin
Maintaining my modest modus as I dream
So while I go through all this, all this bullshit what you call it
Life itself, I know what helps, let me scroll through my Blackberry
("Hey what's up daddy?")


I'm going through something with life
But pussy and Patrón make you feel alright
Pussy and Patrón make you feel alright
Pussy and Patrón, that's some great advice
I'm going through something with life
But pussy and Patrón make you feel alright
Pussy and Patrón make you feel alright
Pussy and Patrón, that's some great advice




"So what'd you rush me out here for?
How was your day? Are you tipsy?"
"Mhm!"


All I need in this lifetime: Pussy and Patrón
Give me that, once you give me that, once again it's on
Bitch I'm swagged up, hoes bopping when I'm off that screw
Coming down clean, tell your baby momma what it do?
Where your friends at? I got long dick, what it is?
Go on poke it out, situate your little positives
How I live? Big shot, on my grind, all ready
I'mma lay it down like a carpenter when you let me...


Give me that funk, that sweet, that nasty, that gushy stuff
I can't get enough, if I offend you, blame it on the liquor babe
Give me that funk, that sweet, that nasty, that gushy stuff
I can't get enough if I offend you...


Uh, I wrote this song when Dave drove home
And caught that flat, in the mean T Flats
And it made me think if we could blink
To change locations where we at
We often get lost in the alcohol bottle
In attempt to ignore pain, problem, and sorrow
Just for a minute, then back to the bullshit
Your car note due and you 'bout to get evicted
Two drugs surely, Patrón, pussy, make it feel alright
But once it's empty and the bitch leave, then it's back to life
You can't run from it, gotta run to it, nigga
The antidote wouldn't last and you knew it, nigga
But still, you proceed to dive deep, ask what's her zodiac sign


I'm going through something with life
But pussy and Patrón make you feel alright
Pussy and Patrón make you feel alright
Pussy and Patrón, that's some great advice
I'm going through something with life
But pussy and Patrón make you feel alright
Pussy and Patrón make you feel alright
Pussy and Patrón, that's some great advice


Okay, welcome to my diary, hmm, where should I begin?
Finna get a swisher and fill it with at least a gram
Crackers watch my every step, man I hate to work for them
One time I tried to work for me, but that shit didn't work for me
And here I am, stressing, questioning my direction man
What to do? Nothing's moving, traffic jam, wiggle through it
Pop the cork and take the fluid, bust that pussy open
Bust that pussy open, bust that pussy open
(Soul!) Balls deep, ya dig? Retrieve, relief, ya dig?
Let's kill a bottle of tequila
And lie butt-naked telling the truth, would ya?
What's up? I had a long day and I really wanna fuck
Take a double shot to the face and forget about my whole day
'Cause all I've been thinking the whole day...


I'm going through something with life
But pussy and Patrón make you feel alright
Pussy and Patrón make you feel alright
Pussy and Patrón, that's some great advice
I'm going through something with life
But pussy and Patrón make you feel alright
Pussy and Patrón make you feel alright
Pussy and Patrón, that's some great advice


All I need in this lifetime: Pussy and Patrón
Give me that, once you give me that, once again it's on
Bitch I'm swagged up, hoes bopping when I'm off that screw
Coming down clean, tell your baby momma what it do?
Where your friends at? I got long dick, what it is?
Go on poke it out, situate your little positives
How I live? Big shot, on my grind, all ready
I'mma lay it down like a carpenter, when you let me...


Oh what up, ho? Oh, what up?
I said oh, what up, ho? Oh, what up?
I said oh, what up, ho? Oh, what up?
Well, alright


I'm going through something with life
But pussy and Patron will make you feel alright
Pussy and Patron make you feel alright
Pussy and Patron, that's some great advice
I'm going through something with life
But pussy and Patron will make you feel alright
Pussy and Patron make you feel alright
Pussy and Patron, that's some great advice


Welcome to my diary, stressing got me gray hairs
Something to inspire me, rather than society's
Woes, let me go, let me shine a lil' bit love
I want diamonds too, Ronnie on Player's Club
I used to have a 9 to 5, fresh out of school that was '05
That bitch was racist, got me fired, ever since then I had no job
Pushing in my mama van, stop for gas on Rosecrans
Trust me these niggas rushed me for something my cousin probably did
Guilty by association story of my life, nigga
You gone make me flip then split your shit, judge give me life, nigga
Pain since my grandma's death, uncle killed at Louis's Burgers
Hold my tears I tried my best, let it go drench my pullover
Cycles of a starving artist tryna go beyond the margin's margin
Maintaining my modest, modest as I dream
So while I go through all this, all this bullshit what you call it
Life itself I know it helps let me scroll through my Blackberry


Hey, whats up daddy
I'm going through something with life
But pussy and Patron will make you feel alright
Pussy and Patron make you feel alright
Pussy and Patron, that's some great advice
I'm going through something with life
But pussy and Patron will make you feel alright
Pussy and Patron make you feel alright
Pussy and Patron, that's some great advice


I said keep reading my diary, when my life's entirely
Surrounded by the irony of living in the city
I said they wouldn't hire me, I said I got my ass beat
And the only thing can help is ass and some titties
So what's up, baby? I said what's up?
I had a long day and I really wanna fuck
See I ain't tryna think about no phone bills
Credit card late fees, Capital One popping up on my caller ID
Pawning my chain in the shop, watching for hollow-tip shots
Watching my vehicle break down on another man's block
Man that's my worst fear, ain't that your worst fear
You know when your transmission go out and can't switch gears
Or run through a pothole at two in the morning
Scared to hit your emergencies cause then they'll be on it
See I know when the harsh reality take its toll
Open up your contacts then scroll


Hey, whats up daddy
I'm going through something with life
But pussy and Patron will make you feel alright
Pussy and Patron make you feel alright
Pussy and Patron, that's some great advice
I'm going through something with life
But pussy and Patron will make you feel alright
Pussy and Patron make you feel alright
Pussy and Patron, that's some great advice


Welcome to my diary, hmm.. where should I begin?
Finna get a Swisher and fill it with at least a gram
Crackers watch my every step, better yet they work my every nerve
Cutting me this worthless check, the concept is so absurd
Like a church in debt, a turtle in a turtle neck
Convertibles with turbojets, fueled by 7-Up and prometh'
I feel like deaths around the corner like the quickest wide receiver
So I took another shot, Tequila hit me like a nina
My sky's gray, my bitches brighter
Always saying lights please, J. Cole's her ghost writer
And I'm the God MC, join my diocese
Free your mind, don't mind society
And finally, everyone got their own problems
Everything is subject to change like broken dollars
I'ma drown in my drink and swim in my woman's vagina
Like a piranha fin, it gets harder than Rihanna when


I'm going through something with life
But pussy and Patron will make you feel alright
Pussy and Patron make you feel alright
Pussy and Patron, that's some great advice
I'm going through something with life
But pussy and Patron will make you feel alright
Pussy and Patron make you feel alright
Pussy and Patron, that's some great advice
Love's gonna get you killed
But pride’s gonna be the death of you and you and me
And you and you and you and me
And you and you and you and me
And you and you and you and me and—


Me, I wasn't taught to share, but care
In another life, I surely was there
Me, I wasn't taught to share, but care
I care, I care


Hell-raising, wheel-chasing, new worldy possessions
Flesh-making, spirit-breaking, which one would you lessen?
The better part, the human heart, you love ’em or dissect 'em
Happiness or flashiness? How do you serve the question?
See, in a perfect world, I would be perfect, world
I don't trust people enough beyond they surface, world
I don't love people enough to put my faith in man
I put my faith in these lyrics, hoping I make a band
I understand I ain't perfect, I probably won't come around
This time I might put you down
Last time I ain't give a fuck, I still feel the same now
My feelings might go numb, you're dealing with cold thumb
I’m willing to give up a leg and arm to show empathy from
Pity parties and functions of you and yours
A perfect world, you probably live another 24
I can’t fake humble just 'cause your ass is insecure
I can’t fake humble just 'cause your ass is insecure


Me, I wasn't taught to share, but care
In another life, I surely was there
Me, I wasn't taught to share, but care
I care, I care


Maybe I wasn’t there
Maybe I wasn't there
Maybe I wasn't there
Maybe I wasn't there


Now, in a perfect world, I probably won't be insensitive
Cold as December but never remember what winter did
I wouldn't blame you for mistakes I made or the bed I laid
Seems like I point the finger just to make a point nowadays
Smiles and cold stares, the temperature goes there
Indigenous disposition, feel like we belong here
I know the walls, they can listen, I wish they could talk back
The hurt becomes repetition, the love almost lost that
Sick venom in men and women overcome with pride
A perfect world is never perfect, only filled with lies
Promises are broken and more resentment come alive
Race barriers make inferior you and I
See, in a perfect world, I'll choose faith over riches
I'll choose work over bitches, I'll make schools out of prison
I'll take all the religions and put 'em all in one service
Just to tell 'em we ain't shit, but He's been perfect, world


Me, I wasn't taught to share, but care
In another life, I surely was there
Me, I wasn't taught to share, but care
I care, I care


Maybe I wasn't there
Maybe I wasn't there
Maybe I wasn't there
Maybe I wasn't there
Smoke good, eat good, live good
Smoke good, eat good, live good
Smoke good, eat good, live good
Smoke good, eat good, live good


I used to want to see the penitentiary, way after elementary
Thought it was cool to look the judge in the face when he sentenced me
Since my uncles was institutionalized
My intuition had said I was suited for family ties
My momma is stressin', my daddy tired
I need me a weapon, these niggas ride
Every minute, hour, and second, ministers tried to save me
How I'm gon' listen when I don't even hear God?
Heaven or Hell, base it all on my instincts
My hands dirty, you worried 'bout mud in your sink
You like to mistake a street nigga for real nigga
The same nigga that kill with ya will squeal with ya
I deal with ya like my son, stare at the sun
And you'll be looking in my eyes, homie
Stand for something or fall for anything
And you working with two left feet at the skating rink
But anyway, this for my niggas
Uncles, 23 hours sending me pictures
I want you to know that I'm so determined to blow
That you hear the music I wrote
Hope it get you off Death Row
You came home to a pocket full of stones
A Metro PC phone, then you went back in
So when I touch the pen, the pen is in my view
I'ma get it right, just so you...


Smoke good, eat good, live good
Smoke good, eat good, live good
Smoke good, eat good, live good
Smoke good, eat good, live good
Smoke good, eat good, live good


And I do this for the city
Got some Hennessy and my real niggas with me
Fuck the police, they gon' have to come and get me
If it feel good to you, holler if you hear me


You like to mistake a street nigga for real nigga
The same nigga that kill with ya will squeal with ya
I like to start it out from the bottom and build with ya
Be on my last dollar and split the bill with ya
I'm 23 with morals and plans of living cordial
Not rich, but wealthy, there's nothing you can tell me
My killings are not remorseful
The city got my back and for that I give them my torso
You think about it; and don't call me lyrical
'Cause really I'm just a nigga that's evil and spiritual
I know some rappers using big words to make their similes curve
My simplest shit be more pivotal
I penetrate the hearts of good kids and criminals
Worrisome individuals that live life critical
So won't you bear witness while I bare feet
So you can walk in my shoes and get to know me
But anyway, this for my pops
On his lunch break eating in that parking lot
On "Wanna Be Heard" probably thought he worked my nerves
But really he was stressing me getting what I deserved
Somebody said my name on the radio
He ain't know I was ready for the world that minute
So the next time he roll up and drop grams in it
He'll probably be out of work, laid back, while he...


Smoke good, eat good, live good
Smoke good, eat good, live good
Smoke good, eat good, live good
Smoke good, eat good, live good
Smoke good, eat good, live good


And I do this for the city
Got some Hennessy and my real niggas with me
Fuck the police, they gon' have to come and get me
If it feel good to you, holler if you hear me


Church is definitely on the move
And now we done took it up to the cathedral
'Cause the ism is enormous, you know what I'm talking 'bout?
We out here rotating under the five P's
Proper preparation prevents poor performance
You know what I'm talking 'bout? Doing my thing
'Cause I'm rotating with my speakers thumping
From the Windy City streets all the way out here
To the streets of Compton, know what I'm talking 'bout?
Church is definitely on the move
And we gonna continue to hustle and grow and develop by far
As I rotate with my true player partner
By the name of Kendrick Lamar, you know what I'm talking 'bout?
This is the ism, this is the vision, you know what I'm talking 'bout?
You gotta get up off your ass and get it, man
That's the only way your pockets gonna expand
I tell you everyday, you know what I'm talking 'bout?
Apply yourself to supply your wealth
Only limitations you'll ever have are those that you place upon yo'self
Church is definitely on the move, you know what I'm talking 'bout?
Exercise your ism, and don't depend on no one else
Cathedral, church, "ism"


Every second, every minute
Man, I swear that she can get it
Say if you a bad bitch, put your hands up high
Hands up high, hands up high
Tell 'em dim the lights down right now
Put me in the mood
I'm talkin' about dark room, perfume, go, go


I recognize your fragrance
Hold up, you ain't never gotta say shit
Uh, and I know your taste is
A little bit, hmm, high maintenance
Uh, everybody else basic
You live life on an everyday basis
With poetic justice, poetic justice
If I told you that a flower bloomed in a dark room
Would you trust it?
I mean, I write poems in these songs dedicated to you when
You're in the mood for empathy, there's blood in my pen
Better yet, where your friends and 'em?
I really wanna know you all
I really wanna show you off
Fuck that, pour up plenty of champagne
Cold nights when you curse this name
You called up your girlfriends
And y'all curled in that little bitty Range
I heard that she wanna go and party, she wanna go and party
Nigga, don't approach her with that Atari
Nigga, that ain't good game, homie, sorry
They say conversation rule a nation, I can tell
But I could never right my wrongs
'Less I write it down for real, P.S


You can get it, you can get it
You can get it, you can get it
And I know just, know just, know just
Know just, know just what you want
Poetic justice, put it in a song, alright
You can get it, you can get it
You can get it, you can get it
And I know just, know just, know just
Know just, know just what you want
Poetic justice, put it in a song, alright


I really hope you play this, 'cause ol' girl, you test my patience
With all these seductive photographs
And all these one-off vacations you've been takin'
Clearly a lot for me to take in, it don't make sense
Young East African girl, you too busy fuckin' with your other man
I was tryna put you on game, put you on a plane
Take you and your momma to the motherland
I could do it, maybe one day
When you figure out you're gonna need someone
When you figure out it's alright here in the city
And you don't run from where we come from
That sound like poetic justice, poetic justice
You were so new to this life, but goddamn, you got adjusted
I mean, I write poems in these songs, dedicated to the fun sex
Your natural hair and your soft skin
And your big ass in that sundress, ooh
Good God, what you doin' that walk for?
When I see that thing move
I just wish we would fight less and we would talk more
They say communication save relations, I can tell
But I can never right my wrongs
Unless I write 'em down for real, P.S


You can get it, you can get it
You can get it, you can get it
And I know just, know just, know just
Know just, know just what you want
Poetic justice, put it in a song, alright
You can get it, you can get it
You can get it, you can get it
And I know just, know just, know just
Know just, know just what you want
Poetic justice, put it in a song, alright


Every time I write these words they become a taboo
Makin' sure my punctuation curve, every letter here's true
Livin' my life in the margin and that metaphor was proof
I'm talkin' poetic justice, poetic justice
If I told you that a flower bloomed in a dark room
Would you trust it? I mean, you need to hear this
Love is not just a verb, it's you lookin' in the mirror
Love is not just a verb, it's you lookin' for it, maybe
Call me crazy, we can both be insane
A fatal attraction is common, and what we have common is pain
I mean, you need to hear this, love is not just a verb
And I can see power steerin', sex drive when you swerve
I want that interference, it's coherent, I can hear it
Uh-huh, that's your heartbeat
It either caught me or it called me, uh-huh
Read slow and you'll find gold mines in these lines
Sincerely, yours truly, and right before you go blind, P.S


You can get it, you can get it
You can get it, you can get it
And I know just, know just, know just
Know just, know just what you want
Poetic justice, put it in a song


"I'm gon' ask you one more time, homie
Where is you from? Or it is a problem."
"Ayy, you over here for Sherane, homie?"
"Yo, I don't care who this nigga over here for
If he don't tell me where he from, it's a wrap! I'm sorry."
"Hol' up, hol' up, hol' up, we gon' do it like this, okay?
I'ma tell you where I'm from, okay?
You gon' tell me where you from, okay?
Or where your grandma stay, where your mama stay, or where your daddy stay, okay?"
"Enough with all this talkin'."
"Matter of fact, get out the van, homie! Get out the car before I snatch you out that motherfucker, homie!"
This is me thinking at 4:43 AM, June 6th


Sometimes I wanna say fuck rapping, I need money now
Like should I start trapping?
If what I write down don't collect this very moment
Then I'm on it, no question
In the streets, my niggas is well connected, let's see
Do I cop a pound of kush, promethazine or push some E?
Oxycontin have me laying on soft cotton when I sleep?
This is deep as the abyss, I'm not just rhyming on the beat
I be in spots, chopping the rocks like Flintstone feet
This is me, frustrated, battling my own evils
Finna saddle up that work across Ohio in a Geo
Or should I sell my music .zip to buy your zip
And hope one day it flourish to a kilo
Track record of a hustler
Rather records on the needle, making music
Clocking fast bank like a shot from Patrick Ewing
My nigga, what you doing on these corners whipping?
"I thought you had a show?" Well, my nigga, I guess I didn't
I'm tryna get this dough, and easy money sounds tempting
Especially when your homies pushing V8 engines
Twenty-two on twenty-sixes, Range Rovers rolling up
Three-fifty for an ounce of fire, I hope I got enough
This industry calling my bluff, I need a new solution
Curb-serving, or I might be in your store boosting
Two-elevens with Mac-11s like fuck Hip Hop
Don't wanna be Pun, don't wanna be B.I.G., don't wanna be Pac
Just give me your funds, A.K.A. everything that you got
Or everything getting shot, for nothing
Leave you in shock, coughing up blood and mumbling
Watch, the plans of a young man sponsor
Moving grams like relocating your mom's momma
Then expand to the Hoover dam, water, sherm
Contraband, they yearn for the butt-naked
Fuck a verse, verses get let off in thirty minutes, six seconds
I disperse to the world of unruly, where I put the mic down
And pick up a sack and a toolie, if you knew me
You'll know I always had a passion for riddling, writing
But lately, I've been thinking 'bout taking chances to brighten
My future financially, so please don't be mad at me
I gotta do what I gotta do, no shit
So I tell my nigga, "Front me, let me put it on the strip"
Then give it back when I think about the consequence
Shit...


There are times, when you need someone
I will be by your side
Oh darling, cause there is a light that shines
Special for you, and me yeah
I-take-I-take-take my chances-chances-chances
Before they pass, they pass, they pass
Pass me by, oh darling
You've got to look at the other side


R.O.T.C—Right On Time Conscience


I do what I wanna do
I say what I wanna say, when I feel, and I
Look in the mirror and know I'm there
With my hands in the air, I'm proud to say yeah
I'm real, I'm real, I'm really, really, real
I'm real, I'm real, I'm really, really, real
I'm real, I'm real, I'm really, really, real
I'm real, I'm real, I'm really, really, real


I promise that I know you very well
Your eyes never lie, even if they tell
Sweet lullabies that come with a smell
Of a dozen roses flipping down the green hill
You're living in a world that come with plan B
Cause plan A never relay a guarantee
And plan C never could say just what it was
And your plans only can pan around love
You love him, you love them, you love her
You love so much, you love when love hurts
You love red bottom and gold that say "Queen"
You love hand-bag on the waist of your jean
You love French tip and trip that pay for
You love bank slip that tell you we paid more
You love a good hand whenever the card dealt
But what love got to do with it when you don't love yourself?


I do what I wanna do
I say what I wanna say, when I feel, and I
Look in the mirror and know I'm there
With my hands in the air, I'm proud to say yeah
I'm real, I'm real, I'm really, really, real
I'm real, I'm real, I'm really, really, real
I'm real, I'm real, I'm really, really, real
I'm real, I'm real, ('Cause before you know it, everything's gone)


I promise that I know you very well
Your eyes never lie, even if they fell
Out the sky and your optics turn stale
Where they mold that's green, I can see you fit the bill
Of living in a world that come with plan B
Cause plan A only can make another mistake
And you can't see success coming from plan C
When it all breaks, you'll still say you're lovely
And love them and love when you love her
You love so much, you love when love hurts
You love fast cars and dead presidents old
You love fast women, you love keepin' control
Of everything that you love, you love beef
You love streets, you love running, ducking police
You love your hood, might even love it to death
But what love got to do with it when you don't love yourself?


I do what I wanna do
I say what I wanna say, when I feel, and I
Look in the mirror and know I'm there
With my hands in the air, I'm proud to say yeah
I'm real, I'm real, I'm really, really, real
I'm real, I'm real, I'm really, really, real
I'm real, I'm real, I'm really, really, real
I'm real, I'm real ('Cause before you know it, everything's gone)


The reason why I know you very well
Cause we have the same eyes, can't you tell?
The days I tried to cover up and conceal
My pride, it only made it harder for me to deal
When living in a world that come with plan B
A scapegoat cause plan A don't come free
And plan C just an excuse like "because"
Or the word "but," but what if I got love?
I love them, I love when I love her
I love so much, I love when love hurts
I love first verse ’cause you're the girl I attract
I love second verse ’cause you're the homie that pack
Burner like a stove top, that love cooking from scratch
I love what the both of you have to offer
In fact, I love it so much, I don't love anything else
But what love got to do with it when I don't love myself
To the point I should hate everything I do love?
Should I hate living my life inside the club?
Should I hate her for watching me for that reason?
Should I hate him for telling me that I'm seizin'?
Should I hate them for telling me "ball out"?
Should I hate street credibility I'm talkin' about
Hating all money, power, respect in my will
Or hating the fact none of that shit make me real?


Kenny, I ain't trippin' off them dominoes anymore. Just calling, sorry to hear what happened to your homeboy, but don't learn the hard way like I did, homie. Any nigga can kill a man, that don't make you a real nigga. Real is responsibility. Real is taking care of your motherfucking family. Real is God, nigga


I do what I wanna do
I say what I wanna say, when I feel, and I
Look in the mirror and know I'm there
With my hands in the air, I'm proud to say yeah
I'm real, I'm real, I'm really, really, real
I'm real, I'm real, I'm really, really, real
I'm real, I'm real, I'm really, really, real
I'm real, I'm real (cause before you know it, everything's gone)


Alright, that's all I wanted to tell you. Just make sure you call us back when you get this message. Here go your mom
Boy, you better have my car on full all this time you done had my damn car, but look I ain't trippin'. Look, the neighbors say they seen you and your little friends over there by Food for Less and they was preaching to you over there telling you about the good book because right about now that's what ya'll need. Oh, and Top Dawg called the house too. I guess they want you and Dave to come to the studio. But look, you take that music business serious, and put out something me and your dad can step to. Shit, you know we from Chicago, you know that's what we do


Sing my song, it's all for you
Sing my song, it's all for you
Sing my song, it's all for you
Sing my song, it's all for you
Sing my song, it's all for you
Sing my song, it's all for you
Sing my song, it's all for you
Sing my song, it's all for you
Sing my song, it's all for you
Sing my song, it's all for you
Sing my song, it's all for you
Sing my song, it's all for you
Sing my song, it's all for you
Sing my song, it's all for you
Sing my song, it's all for you
Sing my song, it's all for you


"If I don't hear from you by tomorrow, I hope you come back and learn from your mistakes. Come back a man, tell your story to these black and brown kids in Compton. Let 'em know you was just like them, but you still rose from that dark place of violence, becoming a positive person. But when you do make it, give back with your words of encouragement, and that's the best way to give back. To your city... And I love you Kendrick, if I don't hear you knocking on the door you know where I usually leave the key. Alright? Talk to you later, bye."

(*Sound of a cassette tape being stopped and fast forwarded*)Kendrick Lamar:
What inspired me as a kid really was, uh, illustrating my thoughts on that sheet of paper

Life's to me like a box of chocolates
(?) something for something, that's the obvious
Flow's so sick, don't you swallow it
Biting my style, you (?)
Come from the same blocks where they pick cotton
Oh, you forgotten, ah, forget it
That life ain't sane

You see gangbanging, drug paraphernalia. You see things from the streets. So what you gon' do? You gon' find something that you love to do and have a passion for it, or you gon' stay, you  know, mingling in the streets until something major happens

So the moment I defined myself and freed myself was the time I locked myself in the studio and said, "You need to do music."

Tonight's for everybody, understand me
The plan B is the one in your hearts
This here is family, Kendrick Lamar
Words like a sword in the hands of a Spartan
Marching on Rosecrans in Compton
You can't cause conflict or corrupt my spirit
I'm on point like period
I've been there and gone before you get near it
Ooh wee, that boy remind me of a young Martin Luther
The way he piece up troopers, then round up shooters
Like Malcolm X did, I stand for what I believe in
That's family, God and honor
From Chicago, my daddy and my momma
Came into Compton to accomplish one thing: reign supreme
Raise a king named Kendrick
I ain't lying, it stand for "King" and I am one
My unborn son and grandson will live royal
From the coochee to the soil
The meek shall inherit the Earth
Well, I've had this world since birth
Feel the good kid's hunger
The Crips made strong, the Pirus made stronger
But it's muscle in my heart
I stare in the eyes of Mozart and tell him I'm the genius
I love myself, really love myself
And I means this with all sole
And you can't control greatness 'less you hating
With the heart of Satan
But even that can't stop it
I tell 'em, "Get out my wallet and passion in your logic"
Passion in your life, the passion of my Christ is in me
And if you say it ain't, you may offend me
Damn, that boy good
I'm bright as Thomas Edison but I'm Gucci Mane in the hood
I stood alone for so long, prolonged my whole career
But now I'm here, you can shoot shots and cheer
Because I am, we are Kendrick Lamar

Getting into that success level where you can go back to your neighborhood and people feel like, you know, uh, they look up to you. Sometimes the most riskiest things you can do can end up being, you know, the most important. Yeah

Teriq Tyson:
My dream's more vivid than Dr. T's, (?) evolutionary
Reporting live, Centennial High, 2014

Kendrick Lamar:
I am Kendrick. I am Kendrick. I am Kendrick. I am Kendrick
Alright, here we go, third take
Real quick, Ali, mm


Got me breathing with dragons
I'll crack the egg in your basket, you bastard
I'm Marilyn Manson with madness
Now just imagine the magic I light to asses
Don't ask for your favorite rapper
(He dead!) Yessir (Amen!) Church
(He dead!) I killed him (Amen!) Bitch


And this is rigor mortis, and it's gorgeous when you die
Ali recorded, and I'm Morpheus; the matrix of my mind
I'm out the orbit, you an orphan and a hairdresser combined
I'm on the toilet when I rhyme, if you the shit, then I decline
I climax where you begin and then I end on cloud nine
And that's important when you morph into an angel in the sky
And don't be forging all my signatures, my listeners reply
And tell me that you biting style, you got a hell of an appetite
And I'ma be here for a while, just buckle up before the ride
Or knuckle up if you can fight, we always making 'em duck or die
A suit and tie is suitable and usual in suicide
CSI just might investigate this fucking parasite
(He dead! Amen!) That's what they telling me
Aim it at your celebrities, this is studio felony
Ferragami, so many, and cool enough for the '70s
Nigga, payback's a bitch, and bitch you been living in debt with me
Dead 'em all, and especially, leave a call on his mother voicemail
That say that he rest in peace, bigger chopper the recipe
Wrestling? That's irrelevant, rather rest at your residence
Whistling to the melody, couldn't think of a better D
Better be on your P and Q, it's just me, Jay Rock, Soul, and Q
Solar system and barbecue, nothing else you can do


(He dead!) Yup-yup (Amen!) I killed him
(He dead!) Hmh, hmh, hm (Amen!) Amen
Got me breathing with dragons
I'll crack the egg in your basket, you bastard
I'm Marilyn Manson, don't ask for your favorite rapper
(He dead!) Yup-yup (Amen!) I know
(He dead!) For sure (Amen!) Amen
Got me breathing with dragons
I'll crack the egg in your basket, you bastard
I'm Marilyn Manson, don't ask for your favorite rapper


I rapped him and made him Casper, I capture the likes of NASA
My pedigree to fly past ya, I'll pass the weed to the pastor
We all are sinners, won't you send us to bible study faster?
Your hypocritesque reaction a blasphemy, I assassin my casualty
And it's casually done, and tell 'em my salary come
A lump sum of hundreds, don't talk to me 'bout no money
The sun is under my feet, and I come in peace to compete
I don't run if you'd rather leap, my statistics go up in weeks
And I go visit the nearest creek, and I get busy on many MC
Really ballistic, anybody can see
Any assistance, everybody deceased
I'm persistence, recognize I be
Really too vicious, the permanent beast
And the demolition, breaking up the street
Better partition, better dot your T
And I gon' mention, how the far you see
Putting my dick in the rap industry
Everybody bitching, getting mad at me
Recognize Kendrick in the battery
And I'm charged up, and the catastrophe
Is charged up, and the audacity
Of y'all fucks never could hassle me
And y'all luck just ran out, you'll see


(He dead!) Yup-yup (Amen!) I know
(He dead!) For sure (Amen!) Amen
Got me breathing with dragons
I'll crack the egg in your basket, you bastard
I'm Marilyn Manson, don't ask for your favorite rapper
(He dead!) Yup-yup (Amen!) I know
(He dead!) For sure (Amen!) Amen
We're far from good, not good from far
90 miles per hour down Compton Boulevard
With the top-down, screaming "We don't give a fuck!"
Drink my 40 ounce of freedom while I roll my blunt
'Cause the kids just ain't alright


Oh, shit nigga, somethin' 'bout to happen, nigga, this shit..
Nigga this sound like 30 ki's under the Compton court building
Hope the dogs don't smell it


Welcome to vigilante, 80's so don't you ask me
I'm hungry, my body's antsy, I rip through your fuckin' pantry
Peelin' off like a Xanny, examine my orchestra
Granny said when I'm old enough, I'll be sure to be all I can be
You niggas Marcus Camby, washed up
Pussy, fix your panties, I'm Mr. Marcus, you getting fucked, uh
You ain't heard nothin' harder since Daddy Kane
Take it in vain, Vicodins couldn't ease the pain
Lightnin' bolts hit your body, you thought it rained
Not a cloud in sight, just the shit that I write
Strong enough to stand in front of a travellin' freight train, are you trained?
To go against Dracula draggin' the record industry by my fangs
AK clips, money clips and gold chains
You walk around with a P90 like it's the 90's
Bullet to your temple, your homicide'll remind me that


Compton Crip niggas ain't nothin' to fuck with
Bompton Pirus ain't nothin' to fuck with
Compton éses ain't nothin' to fuck with
But they fuck with me, and bitch I love it
Woop de woop, woop de woop-woop, woop de woop
Woop de woop, woop de woop-woop (California Dungeons)
Woop de woop, woop de woop-woop, woop de woop
Woop de woop, woop de woop-woop (California Dungeons)


Let's hit the county buildin', gotta cash my check
Spend it all on a 40-ounce to the neck and
In retrospect I remember December being the hottest
Squad cars, neighborhood wars and stolen Mazdas
I tell you mothafuckas that life is full of hydraulics
Up and down, get a 64, better know how to drive it
I'm drivin' on E with no license or registration
Heart racin', racin' past Johnny because he's racist
1987, the children of Ronald Reagan, rake the leaves off
Your front porch with a machine blowtorch (I'm really out here, my nigga)
He blowin' on stress, hopin' to ease the stress (Like, really out here)
He copping some blow, hopin' that it can stretch
Newborn massacre, hopping out the passenger
With calendars, cause your date's comin'
Run him down and then he gun him down, I'm hopin' that you fast enough
Even the legs of Michael Johnson don't mean nothin', because


Compton Crip niggas ain't nothin' to fuck with
Bompton Pirus ain't nothin' to fuck with
Compton éses ain't nothin' to fuck with
But they fuck with me, and bitch I love it
Woop de woop, woop de woop-woop, woop de woop
Woop de woop, woop de woop-woop (California Dungeons)
Woop de woop, woop de woop-woop, woop de woop
Woop de woop, woop de woop-woop (California Dungeons)


Can't detour when you're at war with your city, why run for?
Just ride with me, just die with me, that gun store, right there
When you fight, don't fight fair cause you'll never win


Right, I had the yapper, and I tore they ass up


Can't detour when you're at war with your city, why run for?
Just ride with me, just die with me, that gun store, right there
When you fight, don't fight fair cause you'll never win (Yeah, yeah, yeah)


Whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa
Whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa
Whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa
Whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa


We really out here, my nigga
You niggas don't understand, my nigga
I'm off of pill and Remy Red, my nigga, trippin', my nigga
One time, reporting live, Compton, California


She go to work, she go to school, her body smooth, no tattoos
Type of girl that’ll make your mother feel comfortable
My pops love her too, she’s compatible, she’s independent
She handle her business, she believe in God and no other religions
She's never in competition, when it comes to her friends, she's dependable
She set her own trends, a confidant, a mediator, so sweet, every flavor
Just a conversation with her doing you a favor, look at her hips, I want to be her pager
Conservative, affirmative, actually she relaxing in sweats and bobby pins
The beauty of her, a blind man can see, a true queen and she needs me
She needs me, she needs me, she needs me, she needs me
The beauty of her, swear to God, a blind man can see, a true queen and she needs me


That girl is smoking, and can you believe that I'm her focus?
It ain’t hard to see she got me open, and together we are roller-coasting on


Five years later, an accounting major, work at a firm
Abundance of paper, she got a career, she look in the rear
View mirror of a Mercedes that she can steer
Call her boss, executive meetings, consecutive trips, vacational weekends
Dior reeking through her Prada dress, probably the only product of her pure success
Got a promotion, now she own the building
Headed to the top like she on the building, real estate, property
She order tender steak, only one mouth to feed, funded a youth center
Invested in some stock, doubled what she put in, then bought a restaurant
Oh what a girl, how great life can be, even though she got the world, she needs me
She needs me, she needs me, she needs me, she needs me
Oh what a girl, wonder how her life can be, and though she got the world, she needs me


That girl is smoking, and can you believe that I'm her focus?
It ain’t hard to see she got me open, and together we are roller-coasting on


We lose touch, separated, years pass, I’m outdated
She’s dating one of Hollywood’s famous entertainers, Denzel good
Paparazzi spot ‘em out shopping, Tuesday morning brunch, Benihana's
Tabloids paint a picture of a perfect couple
Headline reads when a famous actor loves you, Emmy Awards, Academy too
On the red carpet, dress matching his suit, she holding his arm
She waves at her moms and wave at the world, got the world in her palms
Head in the clouds, star gazing, caught her on the stage, a proposal was waiting
He bent down, got on one knee, she looked him in the eye and said she needs me
She needs me, she needs me, she needs me, she needs me
Even if we seem to separate, eventually it’ll come to pass, and she’ll need me
I need her, we need we


That girl is smoking, and can you believe that I'm her focus?
It ain’t hard to see she got me open, and together we are roller-coasting on
Lord God, I come to you a sinner
And I humbly repent for my sins
I believe that Jesus is Lord
I believe that You raised him from the dead
I would ask that Jesus come to my life
And be my Lord and Savior
I receive Jesus to take control of my life
And that I may live for him from this day forth
Thank you, Lord Jesus, for saving me with your precious blood
In Jesus' name, amen


I met her at this house party on El Segundo and Central
She had the credentials of strippers in Atlanta
Ass came with a hump, from the jump she was a camel
I want to ride like Arabians, push an '04 Mercedes-Benz
"Hello, my name is Kendrick," she said, "No, you're handsome"
Whispered in my ear, disappeared, then found her dancin'
Ciara had played in the background
The parade music we made had us all wearin' shades now, cool
"Where you stay?" She said, "Down the street from Dominguez High"
Okay, I know that's borderline Compton or Paramount
"Well, is it Compton?" "No," she replied
Then quickly start battin' her eyes
I strictly had wanted her thighs around me
Seventeen with nothin' but pussy stuck on my mental
My motive was rather sinful, "What you tryna get into?"
She didn't tell, just gave me her Nextel
Dropped the number, we chirped the whole summer, and, well
The summer had passed, and now I'm likin' her
Conversation we havin' probably enticin' her
Who can imagine? Maybe my actions'll end up wifin' her
Love or lust, regardless, we'll fuck 'cause the trife in us
It's deep-rooted, the music of bein' young and dumb
Is never muted, in fact, it's much louder where I'm from
We know a lot 'bout each other, her mother was a crack addict
She live with her granny and her younger two brothers
Her favorite cousin Demetrius is irrepetible
Family history of gangbangin' did make me skeptical
But not enough to stop me from gettin' a nut
"I wanna come over, what's up?"
That's what I told her soon as this episode
Of Martin go off, I'm tryna get off
I was in heat like a cactus
My tactics of bein' thirsty probably could hurt me
But fuck it, I got some heart
Grabbed my mama keys, hopped in the car, then, oh boy
So now I'm down Rosecrans in a Caravan
Passin' Alameda, my gas meter in need of a pump
I got enough to get me through the traffic jam
At least I hope, 'cause my pockets broke as a promise, man
I'm thinkin' 'bout that sex
Thinkin' 'bout her thighs or maybe kissin' on her neck or maybe what position's next
Sent a picture of her titties, blowin' up my texts
I looked at 'em and almost ran my front bumper into Corvette
Enthused by the touch of a woman, she's a masseuse
And I'm a professional pornstar when off the Goose
I had a fifth in the trunk like Curtis Jackson for ransom
I'm hopin' to get her loose like an Uncle Luke anthem
I'm two blocks away, two hundred and fifty feet
And six steps from where she stay, she wavin' me 'cross the street
I pulled up, a smile on my face, and then I see
Two niggas, two black hoodies, I froze as my phone rang


Please leave your message for three-two-three
Record your message after the tone
Kendrick, where you at?
Damn, I'm sittin' here waitin' on my van
You told me you was gon' be back in fifteen minutes
Man, I gotta go up to the county buildin', man, these kids ready to eat
I'm ready to eat, shit
I gotta get them food stamps, come on now
You on your way or what?
I hope you ain't out there messin' with them damn hoodrats out there, shit
'Specially that lil' crazy-ass girl Sherane
And plus you got school tomorrow
You keep fuckin' around in them streets, you ain't gon' pass to the next grade
Eleventh grade
(Is that Kendrick on the phone?)
Your daddy callin' about some damn dominoes (Let me holler at him)
He want to holler at you too, go ahead, Kenny, go'n, shit
Hello? Yak, where my motherfuckin' dominoes at?
(Kenny), What?
I'm on his voicemail, damn fool (Oh), shit
Yak, where my motherfuckin' dominoes at?
This the second time I asked you to bring my fuckin' dominoes
Just give me the damn phone, shit, don't hang up, damn, let me
Kendrick, when you get this message, man, call me back (Keep losin' my goddamn dominoes, we gon' have to go in the backyard)
I need to know when you gon' bring back my damn car (And squab, homie)
This man fussin' 'bout some damn dominoes
It ain't all that serious, fuck, damn dominoes
Shit, I'ma miss my damn appointment, fuck
Fuck some damn dominoes, nobody wanna hear that
Nobody wanna hear your ass
Matter fact, cut my motherfuckin' oldies back on
You killin' my motherfuckin' vibe


When the lights shut off and it's my turn
To settle down, my main concern
Promise that you will sing about me
Promise that you will sing about me
I said when the lights shut off and it's my turn
To settle down, my main concern
Promise that you will sing about me
Promise that you will sing about me


I woke up this morning and figured I'd call you
In case I'm not here tomorrow
I'm hopin' that I can borrow
A peace of mind, I'm behind on what's really important
My mind is really distorted
I find nothing but trouble in my life
I'm fortunate you believe in a dream
This orphanage we call a ghetto is quite a routine
And last night was just another distraction
Or a reaction of what we consider madness
I know exactly what happened
You ran outside when you heard my brother cry for help
Held him like a newborn baby and made him feel
Like everything was alright in a fight he tried to put up
But the type of bullet that stuck
Had went against his will, that's blood spilled on your hands
My plan's rather vindictive
Everybody's a victim in my eyes
When I ride it's a murderous rhythm
And outside became pitch black
A demon glued to my back, whispering "Get 'em!"
I got 'em and I ain't give a fuck
That same mentality I told my brother not to duck
In actuality it's a trip how we trip off of colors
I wonder if I'll ever discover a passion like you and recover
The life that I knew as a youngin
In pajamas and dun-ta-duns
When thunder comes it rains cats and dogs dumb
Niggas like me never prosper
Prognosis of a problem child, I'm proud and well-devoted
This Piru shit been in me forever
So forever I'ma push it, wherever, whenever
And I love you 'cause you love my brother like you did
Just promise me you'll tell this story when you make it big
And if I die before your album drop, I hope— 


Promise that you will sing about me
Promise that you will sing about me
I said when the lights shut off and it's my turn
To settle down, my main concern
Promise that you will sing about me
Promise that you will sing about me


You wrote a song about my sister on your tape
And called it Section.80
The message resembled "Brenda's Got a Baby"
What's crazy was I was hearin' about it
But doubted your ignorance
How could you ever just put her on blast and shit?
Judgin' her past and shit?
Well, it's completely my future
Her nigga behind me right now askin' for ass and shit
And I'ma need that forty dollars
Even if I got to fuck, suck and swallow
In the parking lot, Gonzales Park, I'm followed
By a married man, and father of three
My titties bounce on the cadence of his tinklin' keys
Matter of fact, he my favorite 'cause he tip me with E's
He got a cousin named David and I seen him last week
This is the life of another girl damaged by the system
These foster homes, I run away and never do miss 'em
See, my hormones just run away and if I can get 'em
Back to where they used to be, then I'll probably be in the denim
Of a family gene that show women how to be woman
Or better yet, a leader, you need her to learn somethin'
Then you probably need to beat her, that's how I was taught
Three niggas in one room, first time I was tossed
And I'm exhausted, but fuck that "Sorry for your loss" shit
My sister died in vain, but what point are you tryna gain
If you can't fit the pumps I walk in?
I'll wait… Your rebuttal a little too late
And if you have a album date, just make sure I'm not in the song
'Cause I don't need the attention, bring enough of that on my own
And matter fact, did I mention that I physically feel great?
A doctor's approval is a waste of time, I know I'm straight
I'll probably live longer than you and never fade away
I'll never fade away, I'll never fade away, I know my fate
And I'm on the grind for this cake, I'ma get it or die tryin'
I'm eyein' every male gender with intentions of buyin'
You lyin' to these motherfuckers
Talkin' about you can help 'em with my story
You can help me if you sell this pussy for me, nigga
Don't ignore me, nigga, fuck your glory, nigga, you ain't shit...


When the lights shut off and it's my turn
To settle down, my main concern
Promise that you will sing about me
Promise that you will sing about me
I said when the lights shut off and it's my turn
To settle down, my main concern
Promise that you will sing about me
Promise that you will sing about me


Sometimes I look in the mirror
And ask myself: Am I really scared of passin' away?
If it's today, I hope I hear a
Cry out from Heaven so loud it can water down a demon
With the Holy Ghost 'til it drown in the blood of Jesus
I wrote some raps that made sure that my lifeline reekin'
The scent of a reaper, ensurin' that my allegiance
With the other side may come soon, and if I'm doomed
May the womb of my mother be blessed for many moons
I suffer a lot
And every day that glass mirror get tougher to watch
I tie my stomach in knots
And I'm not sure why I'm infatuated with death
My imagination is surely an aggravation of threats
That can come about, ’cause the tongue is mighty powerful
And I can name a list of your favorites that probably vouch
Maybe 'cause I'm a dreamer and sleep is the cousin of death
Really stuck in the schema of wonderin' when I'ma rest
And you're right, your brother was a brother to me
And your sister's situation was the one that pulled me
In a direction to speak on somethin'
That's realer than the TV screen
By any means, wasn't tryin' to offend or come between
Her personal life, I was like "It need to be told"
Cursin' the life of twenty generations after her soul
Exactly what'd happen if I ain't continue rappin'
Or steady bein' distracted by money, drugs and 4-5's
I count lives, all on these songs
Look at the weak and cry, pray one day you'll be strong
Fightin' for your rights, even when you're wrong
And hope that at least one of you sing about me when I'm gone
Am I worth it? Did I put enough work in?


Promise that you will sing about me
Promise that you will sing about me
I said when the lights shut off and it's my turn
To settle down, my main concern
Promise that you will sing about me
Promise that you will sing about me


Promise that you'll sing about me forever
Promise that you'll sing about me for— ooooh
Promise that you'll sing about me forever
Promise that you'll sing about me for— ooooh
Promise that you'll sing about me forever
Promise that you'll sing about me for— ooooh
Promise that you'll sing about me forever
Promise that you'll sing about me for— ooooh






(On the phone)
"Ay, ay, ay, Where you 'bout to go?"
"Nigga, the homie's brother-- nigga, right here, he gone, my nigga, he gone!"
"Nigga-- they just killed the homie's brother, my nigga. We right here on the block, my nigga."
"Al- alright, nigga-- nigga just come-- alright, alright, just call me back, man, just call me back."

"Arghh... Fuck!
So what we gon' do, my niggas? What we gon' do?"
"Bro, we can go back right now, my nigga. Like... nigga, I don't give a fuck, my nigga. We can go back right now"
"Fuck! I'm tired of this shit! I'm tired of fuckin' runnin', I'm tired of this shit! My brother, homie!"


Tired of runnin', tired of huntin'
My own kind, but retirin' nothin'
Tires are steady screechin', the driver is rubbin'
Hands on the wheel, who said we wasn't
Dyin' of thirst, dyin' of thirst, dyin' of thirst?


Dope on the corner, look at the coroner
Daughter is dead, mother is mournin' her
Stray bullets, AK bullets
Resuscitation was waitin' patiently, but they couldn't
Bring her back, who got the footage?
Channel 9, cameras is lookin'
It's hard to channel your energy when you know he crooked
Banana clip, split his banana pudding
I'm like Tre, that's Cuba Gooding
I know I'm good at
Dyin' of thirst, dyin' of thirst, dyin' of thirst


How many sins? I'm runnin' out
How many sins? I lost count
Dreams of ballin' like Spalding
But only shotty bounce
The reaper callin', I'm cottonmouth
Money is power (Money is power)
Yours is ours (Yours is ours)
Lay with a snitch, die with a coward
Hope we get rich, hope we can tower
Over the city with vanity with the music louder
The same song, a black flower
I'll show you how to
Dye your thirst, dye your thirst, dye your thirst


What are we doin'? Who are we foolin'?
Hell is hot, fire is proven
To burn for eternity, return of the student
That never learned how to live righteous but how to shoot it
Tired of runnin', choirs is hummin'
Tell us to visit, we lie about comin'
Now back to business, loadin' the guns in
Back of the Buick, your hood is feudin'
The beef is bubblin', it's no discussion
Hereditary, all of my cousins
Dyin' of thirst, dyin' of thirst, dyin' of thirst


Too many sins, I'm runnin' out
Somebody send me a well for the drought
See all I know is takin' notes
On takin' this life for granted, granted, if he provoke
My best days, I stress days
(Lord, forgive me for all my sins, for I not know—)
My best days, I stress days
Say "fuck the world," my sex slave
Money, pussy, and greed—what's my next crave?
Whatever it is, know it's my next grave
Tired of runnin', tired of runnin', tired of tumblin'
Tired of runnin', tired of tumblin' – backwards
My momma say "See, a pastor give me a promise
What if today was the rapture and you completely tarnished?
The truth will set you free, so to me be completely honest
You dyin' of thirst, you dyin' of thirst
So hop in that water, and pray that it works."


Fuck! I’m tired of this shit!
I’m tired of fuckin' runnin', I’m tired of this shit!
That’s my brother, homie!
Young man, come talk to me! Is that what I think that is?
I know that's not what I think that is
Why are you so angry?
See, you young men are dying of thirst
Do you know what that means?
That means you need water, holy water
You need to be baptized, with the spirit of the Lord
Do you want to receive God as your personal savior?
Okay, repeat after me:
"Lord God, I come to You a sinner."
(Lord God, I come to You a sinner)
"And I humbly repent for my sins."
(And I humbly repent for my sins)
"I believe that Jesus is Lord."
(I believe that Jesus is Lord)
"I believe you raised Him from the dead."
(I believe you raised Him from the dead)
"I would ask that Jesus come into my life."
(I would ask that Jesus come in my life)
"And be my Lord and Savior."
(And be my Lord and Savior)
"I receive Jesus to take control of my life."
(I receive Jesus to take control of my life)
"And that I may live for Him from this day forward."
(And that I may live for Him from this day forward)
"Thank you, Lord Jesus
For saving me with Your precious blood."
(Thank you, Lord Jesus
For saving me with Your precious blood)
"In Jesus' name, amen."
(In Jesus' name, amen)
Alright now, remember this day
The start of a new life – your REAL life


Pour up (Drank), head shot (Drank)
Sit down (Drank), stand up (Drank)
Pass out (Drank), wake up (Drank)
Faded (Drank), faded (Drank)


Now I done grew up 'round some people livin' their life in bottles
Granddaddy had the golden flask
Backstroke every day in Chicago
Some people like the way it feels
Some people wanna kill their sorrows
Some people wanna fit in with the popular, that was my problem
I was in a dark room, loud tunes
Lookin' to make a vow soon
That I'ma get fucked up, fillin' up my cup I see the crowd mood
Changin' by the minute and the record on repeat
Took a sip, then another sip, then somebody said to me


Nigga, why you babysittin' only two or three shots?
I'ma show you how to turn it up a notch
First you get a swimming pool full of liquor, then you dive in it
Pool full of liquor, then you dive in it
I wave a few bottles, then I watch 'em all flock
All the girls wanna play Baywatch
I got a swimming pool full of liquor and they dive in it
Pool full of liquor, I'ma dive in it


Pour up (Drank), head shot (Drank)
Sit down (Drank), stand up (Drank)
Pass out (Drank), wake up (Drank)
Faded (Drank), faded (Drank)


Okay, now open your mind up and listen me, Kendrick
I am your conscience, if you do not hear me
Then you will be history, Kendrick
I know that you're nauseous right now
And I'm hopin' to lead you to victory, Kendrick
If I take another one down
I'ma drown in some poison, abusin' my limit
I think that I'm feelin' the vibe, I see the love in her eyes
I see the feelin', the freedom is granted
As soon as the damage of vodka arrived
This how you capitalize, this is parental advice
Then apparently, I'm over-influenced by what you are doin'
I thought I was doin' the most 'til someone said to me


Nigga, why you babysittin' only two or three shots?
I'ma show you how to turn it up a notch
First you get a swimming pool full of liquor, then you dive in it
Pool full of liquor, then you dive in it
I wave a few bottles, then I watch 'em all flock
All the girls wanna play Baywatch
I got a swimming pool full of liquor and they dive in it
Pool full of liquor, I'ma dive in it


Pour up (Drank), head shot (Drank)
Sit down (Drank), stand up (Drank)
Pass out (Drank), wake up (Drank)
Faded (Drank), faded (Drank)


I ride, you ride, bang
One chopper, one hundred shots, bang
Hop out, do you bang?
Two chopper, two hundred shots, bang
I ride, you ride, bang
One chopper, one hundred shots, bang
Hop out, do you bang?
Two chopper, two hundred shots, bang


Nigga, why you babysittin' only two or three shots?
I'ma show you how to turn it up a notch
First you get a swimming pool full of liquor, then you dive in it
Pool full of liquor, then you dive in it
I wave a few bottles, then I watch 'em all flock
All the girls wanna play Baywatch
I got a swimming pool full of liquor and they dive in it
Pool full of liquor, I'ma dive in it


Pour up (Drank), head shot (Drank)
Sit down (Drank), stand up (Drank)
Pass out (Drank), wake up (Drank)
Faded (Drank), faded (Drank)


(Pool full of Kendrick's lies in it)
Aw man… where is she takin' me?
Where is she takin' me?
(Pool full of liquor ima die in it)


All I have in life is my new appetite for failure
And I got hunger pain that grow insane
Tell me, do that sound familiar?
If it do, then you're like me
Makin' excuse that your relief
Is in the bottom of the bottle and the greenest indo leaf
As the window open I release
Everything that corrode inside of me
I see you jokin', why you laugh?
Don't you feel bad? I probably sleep
And never ever wake up, never ever wake up, never ever wake up
In God I trust, but just when I thought I had enough


They stomped the homie out over a bitch?
K-Dot, you good, blood?
Now we can drop, ye we can drop you back off
That nigga's straight, man, that nigga ain't trippin'
We gon' do the same ol' shit
I'ma pop a few shots, they gon' run, they gon' run opposite ways
Fall right in ****'s lap
And he gon' tear they ass up, simple as that
And I hope that bitch that set him up out there
We gon' pop that bitch too
Wait hold up, ayy, I see somebody

Aha! Got them niggas, K-Dot, you good?
L****, you good?
Yeah, blood, I'm good – Dave, you good?
Dave? Dave, say somethin' – Dave?
These bitch-ass niggas killed my brother!


Don't judge me


I know this girl, she a real good girl and she be low-key
Looking like a star, with a real nice car, a Mercedes key
She got a nigga and she love this nigga, well, at least I think
Everytime we bark, she pay us no mind in the middle of the street
She be like:


Fuck them other niggas 'cause I'm down for my nigga
Fuck them other niggas 'cause I'm down for my nigga
Fuck them other niggas, I'll ride for my nigga
I'll die for my nigga, fuck them other...


Until one day he wasn't acting right
In the middle of the night, she checked his phone, Erica, right
When he plead the fifth, man, it was on, matter of fact she gone
Matter of fact Tyrone was on speed dial
So when she got home, it was going down, she go:


Fuck that other nigga when she tired of her nigga
Fuck that other nigga when she tired of her nigga
Fuck that other nigga when she tired of her nigga
Sick of lies from her nigga, fuck that other...


I know this girl, she a real hood girl, and she with the shit
Keep her hair tied up, big bamboos, Mike Jordan kicks
With that big butt, but when I try to holla, she gon' resist
In her man she trust, so when I walk by her, she be screaming this
She be like:


Fuck them other niggas 'cause I'm down for my nigga
Fuck them other niggas 'cause I'm down for my nigga
Fuck them other niggas, I'll ride for my nigga
I'll die for my nigga, fuck them other...


Until one day he wasn't acting right in the middle of the night
She checked his pockets, found condoms by Magnum
And the moment they was acknowledged, she popped his eye
Then ran outside, then started driving on the passenger side
Homeboy was smiling, she gon':


Fuck that other nigga when she tired of her nigga
Fuck that other nigga when she tired of her nigga
Fuck that other nigga when she tired of her nigga
Sick of lies from her nigga, fuck that other...


And so, these girls, these vulnerable girls, took they men up
Put 'em in their world, their vulnerable world, and just like that
It was only getting they feelings hurt, tell me how that sound?
They got fed up with the biggest question mark, they curious now
Cause when women get sick of men, they think of a big helping hand
To lend each other uncover emotions when lights dim
So when she telling her to come over, it'll be alright
The minute she hit the block and turn left, she'll be turning dyke, they:


Fuck with other bitches when they tired of these niggas
Fuck with other bitches when they tired of these niggas
Fuck with other bitches on the side 'cause these niggas...


Tammy's song
Reporting live, from Compton, California
North Cackalack


Now everybody just bow to the greatness, or die in the matrix
You're hereby dating, my destiny's waiting
My itinerary is very hectic
I break records on every record, I'm truly reckless
Kendrick Lamar, no Audemar on my wrist
Its arthritis from holding it down bitch
Me and my down bitch, get busy
I'm busy taking over, the world
With the weight of the world on my shoulder
My drive is not to be chauffeured
I'm live, come to the harvest, welcome the artist
Whose lyrics out of the orbit, more than the hardest rapper
To hit the market and market myself as a shooting target
With offers that got me up in these offices often
Boo-yaa, who ya? No one, I've done situated myself, I ain't lying
Be sure to be friend cause my foes die five times
The good kid from the mad city
Holding a cereal box instead of a Glock
In a 1992 Cadillac that I got from my pops
Transmission slipping, but I ain't tripping, swallow my pride
Pop in my tape and roll the window, down
Like Stacie homie when airing out endo
I wish a nigga would


A yes yes y'all, and you don't stop
A yes yes y'all, and you don't stop
A yes yes y'all, and you don't stop
Kendrick, show these muh'fuckers how we rock
A yes yes y'all, and you don't stop
A yes yes y'all, and you don't stop
A yes yes y'all, and you don't stop
Big Pooh, show these muh'fuckers how we rock


Yo, it's evident, I'm evidently your favorite
All I ask, open your ears and please savor it
The taste is un-acquired, quietly, been inspired
I'm at a point in my life when I was getting tired
Now I'm brushing off the dust
We don't need no water, fire burned it to the dust
Nigga grind hard, roaches turning into musk
People hear his pain, I consider that a plus
I'm a grown man, so a few I have trust to Do the Right Thing
The Spike thing, consider me the in-between
The new regime taking over
Either we each other's opposition or you soldier
Used to have the whole state of NC on my shoulder then I passed it
Off to the next, you unlucky bastard
I'm getting drunk same time every year
To celebrate the life, Rosie no longer here
I swear


A yes yes y'all, and you don't stop
A yes yes y'all, and you don't stop
A yes yes y'all, and you don't stop
Kendrick, show these muh'fuckers how we rock
A yes yes y'all, and you don't stop
A yes yes y'all, and you don't stop
A yes yes y'all, and you don't stop
Big Pooh, show these muh'fuckers how we rock


Me and Big Pooh like the definition of a two-man city zoo
Even Zeus can get beat up from punchlines
When I kick it and pump mine, I've got to be a prophet
I've gotta make a profit big enough to have a thirty pound wallet
I'm a Hub City representer, so I've got to represent the
City like a District Attorney beatin' the case for killers
Might walk around in gurney, this is my sickest winter
Since I had the flu and flew in the hospital with the shivers


U-P-S, I deliver
Little brown boy get the pick of the litter
No glitter, all guts, no glory
Station on repeat, they retread the same story
New niggas bore me, tryna progress to that old shit
Have a plate, that food for your soul tip
Drill it in your head, youngun it's that real Hip-
Hop along 'fore you get your little ass whipped


A yes yes y'all, and you don't stop
A yes yes y'all, and you don't stop
A yes yes y'all, and you don't stop
Kendrick, show these muh'fuckers how we rock
A yes yes y'all, and you don't stop
A yes yes y'all, and you don't stop
A yes yes y'all, and you don't stop
Big Pooh, show these muh'fuckers how we rock


Everybody, everybody, everybody
Everybody sit yo bitch-ass down
And listen to this true mothafuckin' story
Told by Kendrick Lamar on Rosecrans, ya bitch


Smokin' on the finest dope, ay-ay-ay-ah
Drank until I can't no mo', ay-ay-ay-ah
Really I'm a sober soul
But I'm with the homies right now
And we ain't askin' for no favors
Rush a nigga quick, then laugh about it later, ay-ay-ay-ah
Really, I'm a peacemaker
But I'm with the homies right now
And Momma used to say (Say, say, say, say)
One day it's gon' burn you out (Woo)
One day it's gon' burn you out, out, out
One day it's gon' burn you out (You, you, you, you, you, you)
One day it's gon' burn you
But I'm with the homies right now




Me and my niggas four deep in a white Toyota
A quarter tank of gas, one pistol and orange soda
Janky stash box when the federales'll roll up
Basketball shorts with the Gonzales Park odor
We on the mission for bad bitches and trouble
I hope the universe love you today
'Cause the energy we bringin' sure to carry away
A flock of positive activists that fill they body with hate
If it's necessary; bumpin' Jeezy first album, lookin' distracted
Speakin' language only we know, you think it's an accent
The windows roll down, all I see is a hand pass it
Hotboxin' like George Foreman grillin' the masses
Of the workin' world; we pulled up on a bunch of workin' girls
And asked them what they workin' with
Look at me, I got the blunt in my mouth
Usually I'm drug-free, but, shit, I'm with the homies


Yeah, nigga, we off a pill and Remy Red
Come through and bust ya head, nigga!
Me and the homies
Sag all the way to the liquor store
Where my niggas pour up 4 and get twisted some more
Me and the homies
I ride for my mothafuckin' niggas
Hop out, do my stuff, then hop back in
Me and the homies
Matter of fact, I hop out that mothafucka
And be like "doo-doo-doo-doot, doo-doo-doo-doo-doot!”


It's 2:30 and the sun is beamin'
Air conditioner broke and I hear my stomach screamin'
Hungry for anything unhealthy
And if nutrition can help me
I'll tell you to suck my dick, then I'll continue eatin'
We speedin' on the 405, passin' Westchester
You know, the light-skinned girls in all the little dresses
Good Lord, they knew we weren't from 'round there
'Cause every time we down there
We pullin' out the Boost Mobile SIM cards
Bougie bitches with no extensions
Hood niggas with bad intentions, the perfect combination
Before we sparked a conversation
We seen three niggas in colors we didn't like
Then started interrogatin'
I never was a gangbanger, I mean
I never was stranger to the fonk neither, I really doubt it
Rush a nigga quick and then we laugh about it
That's ironic, 'cause I've never been violent
Until I'm with the homies


(Just ridin', just ridin')
Me and the homies
(Bullshittin', actin' a fool)
Me and the homies
(Trippin', really trippin')
Me and the homies
(Just ridin', just ridin', just ridin')


Braggin' 'bout the episode we just had
A shot of Hennessy didn't make me feel that bad
I'm usually a true firm believer of bad karma
Consequences from evil will make your past haunt ya
We tryna conquer the city with disobedience
Quick to turn it up, even if we ain't got the CD in
But Jeezy still playin'
And our attitude is still "nigga, what is you sayin'?"
Pull in front of the house
That we been campin' out for like two months
The sun is goin' down as we take whatever we want


Ayy, ayy, nigga, jackpot, nigga, pop the safe!
Ayy, nigga, I think there's somebody in this room!
Wait, what?!
Nigga, there's somebody in this room!


I hit the back window in search of any Nintendo
DVD's, plasma-screen TV's in the trunk
We made a right, then made a left, then made a right
Then made a left, we was just circlin' life
My mama called: "Hello? What you doin'?" — "Kickin' it."
I shoulda told her I'm probably 'bout to catch my first offense
With the homies
But – they made a right, then made a left
Then made a right, then another right
One lucky night with the homies


K. Dot, you faded, hood?
Yeah, we finally got that nigga faded
I think he hit the wrong blunt though
Ooh, which one?
Well, which one he talkin' about?
I was finna hit the one with the shenanigans in it
I pray he ain't hit that
Nah, that nigga straight, he ain't hit that one
Got the shenanigans? Give that nigga the shenanigans!
Nigga, I think we should push back to the city, fo' real doe
Nigga, for what?
What that nigga— what's that Jeezy song say, nigga?
"Last time I checked I was the man on these streets!"
Yeah, yeah, that shit right there
I'm tryna be the nigga in the street
There he go. Man, you don't even know how the shit go
Look, here's the plan, luv
We gon' use the kickback as a alibi, wait 'til the sun go down, roll out, complete the mission, drop K. Dot off at his mama van, at the park
'Cause I know he tryna fuck on Sherane tonight
That's what he's not gon' do
Then we all gon' meet back at the block at about 10:30
That's straight, but we should meet up around 12
I'm tryna fuck on somethin' too
Nigga, sit yo dumb-ass back down!
Nigga, you ain't doin' shit tonight!
Matter of fact, nigga, get in the mothafuckin' car!
We finna get active!


Everything black, I don't want black (They want us to bow)
I want everything black, I ain't need black (Down to our knees)
Some white, some black, I ain't mean black (And pray to the God)
I want everything black (We don't believe)
Everything black, want all things black
I don't need black, want everything black
Don't need black, our eyes ain't black
I own black, own everything black


Six in the morn'
Fire in the street
Burn, baby, burn (You, you, you, you, you)
That's all I wanna see (You, you, you, you, you)
And sometimes I get off watchin' you die in vain
It's such a shame they may call me crazy
They may say I suffer from schizophrenia or somethin'
But homie, you made me (You, you, you, you, you)
Black don't crack, my nigga


I'm the biggest hypocrite of 2015
Once I finish this, witnesses will convey just what I mean
Been feelin' this way since I was sixteen, came to my senses
You never liked us anyway, fuck your friendship, I meant it
I'm African-American, I'm African, I'm black as the moon
Heritage of a small village, pardon my residence
Came from the bottom of mankind
My hair is nappy, my dick is big, my nose is round and wide
You hate me don't you?
You hate my people, your plan is to terminate my culture
You're fuckin' evil
I want you to recognize that I'm a proud monkey
You vandalize my perception but can't take style from me
And this is more than confession
I mean I might press the button just so you know my discretion
I'm caught in my feelings, I know that you feel it
You sabotage my community, makin' a killin'
You made me a killer, emancipation of a real nigga


The blacker the berry, the sweeter the juice
The blacker the berry, the sweeter the juice
The blacker the berry, the sweeter the juice
The blacker the berry, the bigger I shoot


I said they treat me like a slave, cah' me black
Woi, we feel a whole heap of pain, cah' we black
And man a say they put me inna chains, cah' we black
Imagine now, big gold chains full of rocks
How you no see the whip, left scars 'pon me back
But now we have a big whip parked 'pon the block
All them say we doomed from the start, cah' we black
Remember this, every race start from the block, jus 'member dat


I'm the biggest hypocrite of 2015
Once I finish this, witnesses will convey just what I mean
I mean, it's evident that I'm irrelevant to society
That's what you're tellin' me, penitentiary would only hire me
Curse me 'til I'm dead, church me with your fake prophesizing
That I'ma be just another slave in my head
Institutionalized manipulation and lies
Reciprocation of freedom only live in your eyes
You hate me don't you?
I know you hate me just as much as you hate yourself
Jealous of my wisdom and cards I dealt
Watchin' me as I pull up, fill up my tank, then peel out
Muscle cars like pull ups, show you what these big wheels 'bout, ah
Black and successful, this black man meant to be special
Katzkins on my radar, bitch, how can I help you?
How can I tell you I'm making a killin'?
You made me a killer, emancipation of a real nigga


The blacker the berry, the sweeter the juice
The blacker the berry, the sweeter the juice
The blacker the berry, the sweeter the juice
The blacker the berry, the bigger I shoot


I said they treat me like a slave, cah' me black
Woi, we feel a whole heap of pain, cah' we black
And man a say they put me inna chains, cah' we black
Imagine now, big gold chains full of rocks
How you no see the whip, left scars 'pon me back
But now we have a big whip parked 'pon the block
All them say we doomed from the start, cah' we black
Remember this, every race start from the block, jus 'member dat


I'm the biggest hypocrite of 2015
When I finish this if you listen then sure you will agree
This plot is bigger than me, it's generational hatred
It's genocism, it's grimy, little justification
I'm African-American, I'm African
I'm black as the heart of a fuckin' Aryan
I'm black as the name of Tyrone and Darius, excuse my French
But fuck you — no, fuck y'all, that's as blunt as it gets
I know you hate me, don't you?
You hate my people, I can tell 'cause it's threats when I see you
I can tell 'cause your ways deceitful
Know I can tell because you in love with that Desert Eagle
Thinkin' maliciously, he get a chain then you gone bleed him
It's funny how Zulu and Xhosa might go to war
Two tribal armies that wanna build and destroy
Remind me of these Compton Crip gangs that live next door
Beefin' with Pirus, only death settle the score
So don't matter how much I say I like to preach with the Panthers
Or tell Georgia State "Marcus Garvey got all the answers"
Or try to celebrate February like it's my B-Day
Or eat watermelon, chicken, and Kool-Aid on weekdays
Or jump high enough to get Michael Jordan endorsements
Or watch BET 'cause urban support is important
So why did I weep when Trayvon Martin was in the street
When gang-banging make me kill a nigga blacker than me?
Hypocrite!






Smokin' weed with you
'Cause you taught me to
Smokin' weed with you
'Cause you taught me to


Every morning when I wake up, uh
Money on my mind, good time to get caked up, uh
Sunshine coming through my blinds, I’m living, but
Really though, it's never enough, ten million, that's a must
Living in California, everybody wanna visit for
Women, weed and weather
They come for women, weed and weather
For the women, weed and weather
From all around the world for the women, weed and weather
These niggas'll kill for that, put it in your grill for that
Still everybody gotta build for that, me? I make mills off that
How the fuck y'all can't see I ride, when I drive
Down the block and you look outside
H-A-T-E in your eyes, I enter big money for the enterprise
It's a beautiful day, I guess, for a bitch to roll with Andre, I guess
Roll it up, baby, come and lift that dress
Then roll it up for me when I'm stressed


You might catch me in Atlanta looking like a boss
New Orleans and then Miami, party in New York
Texas, I be screwed up, Chi-Town, I be really pimpin'
But nothing like my hometown, I'm forever livin'


Women, weed and weather
They come for women, weed and weather
For the women, weed and weather
From all around the world for the women, weed and weather
Got that women, weed and weather
Don't it sound clever? Come and play
Wh-what more can I say? W-welcome to LA


Uhh, my nigga said he wanna fly out to get him some
Three W's only for a three-day run, bitch
Take them mothafuckin' panties off, you ain't no nun, shit
I be living in the sky every time I ride by them hoes
"Ribbon In The Sky" on the radio 'cause Stevie know I control
Let it breathe, I control, California living 'til I am old
You want to be on to peak on the charts
So the peons can be gone and pee on their hearts
She in the coupe, she in the Neon
'Cause she on the BS before we can start
Fuck with a nigga, ride with a nigga
Let 'em know I'm priority, order me
Hennessy and, for my niggas, OG Killa
Call it Jason Voorhees, boy, he's on his job
Boy, he sure be having the marks on they mark
Pretty bitches and tire marks, let 'em inhale them pipe exhausts
Let 'em reveal how much it cost for this life, controlling my price?
No way, hell no, uh-uh
If I'm wrong, I don't wanna be right
We want to be on to peak on the charts
So the peons can be gone and pee on their hearts
Women, weed, weather, it's not my fault
That it's 82 degrees and my top peeled off


You might catch me in Atlanta looking like a boss
New Orleans and then Miami, party in New York
Texas, I be screwed up, Chi-Town, I be really pimpin'
But nothing like my hometown, I'm forever livin'


Women, weed and weather
They come for women, weed and weather
For the women, weed and weather
From all around the world for the women, weed and weather
Got that women, weed and weather
Don't it sound clever? Come and play
Wh-what more can I say? W-welcome to LA


Known for that homegrown where I come from
Smoke one, palm trees, double D's got 'em topless in the sun
I shall proceed, that's me, mothafuck your opinion
Huh, how many ways am I killing 'em? Shit, right around a billion
We on it, that mean we living for the moment
That mean she'll fuck 'til the morning, time and I got time
And I know that I'm in a position of controlling
Anything out by that ocean
I'm a boss, I'll buy that ocean, ain't nobody fucking with this


They want that shit, they often fiend
I give it to 'em, but in between
My time, I gotta tie shoestrings
Life's a trip when you want these things
I often slip and then I lean
Toward three W's in life
You know blow job need an application
Eating pussy make appetite
And yeah, my type, I like 'em brown
Just like my drink, the fuck you think?
I don't fuck with no hand-me-downs
See if you fuck, then it's after me
You know how much I'ma make it work?
You know her dress livin' in her purse
When you discuss your love for lust
Just make sure you visit here first: Cali


You might catch me in Atlanta looking like a boss
New Orleans and then Miami, party in New York
Texas, I be screwed up, Chi-Town, I be really pimpin'
But nothing like my hometown, I'm forever livin'


Women, weed and weather
They come for women, weed and weather
For the women, weed and weather
From all around the world for the women, weed and weather
Got that women, weed and weather
Don't it sound clever? Come and play
Wh-what more can I say? W-welcome to LA


I know a lot of people that smile in my face
But talk behind my back every time I'm gone
So when they call my number, I don't never pick up
I don't owe you shit, bitch, leave me alone
I'm going big, suck my dick
I'm going big, suck my dick
I'm going big, suck my dick
I'm going big, suck my dick


Too many niggas, not enough hoes
And some of you niggas, acting like hoes
Stay to myself like loners do
Get high by myself, I'm not in the mood
To politic or be fake with you
We apologize if you ever knew
Too many niggas, and not enough hoes
And most of you niggas, acting like hoes


Everything I do is too alumni
I'ma take my time, I'ma master it
You should be mindful of a mastermind
Put a landmine right where your momma live
Now blow up, blow up, hold up, I ain't seen your kind before
See me as a dollar sign 'til I resign or you report
That I done you wrong, and I mean you know my home endeavors
Nigga right now, it's now or never
Nigga right now, I'm high as ever, but however...


I know a lot of people that smile in my face
But talk behind my back every time I'm gone
So when they call my number, I don't never pick up
I don't owe you shit, bitch, leave me alone
I'm going big, suck my dick
I'm going big, suck my dick
I'm going big, suck my dick
I'm going big, suck my dick


Too many niggas, not enough hoes
And some of you niggas, acting like hoes
Stay to myself like loners do
Get high by myself, I'm not in the mood
To politic or be fake with you
We apologize if you ever knew
Too many niggas, and not enough hoes
And most of you niggas, acting like hoes


Everybody heard that I fuck with Dre
And they wanna tell me, I made it
Nigga I ain't made shit, if he gave me a handout
I'ma take his wrist and break it
Nigga, I'm faded off of that Nuvo, chilling with two hoes in here
And they tie my laces, living the Matrix as them pills disappear
Me and my niggas just acting bad HiiiPower conglomerate
Living that life and counting this cash old friends I no longer have


I know a lot of people that smile in my face
But talk behind my back every time I'm gone
So when they call my number, I don't never pick up
I don't owe you shit, bitch, leave me alone
I'm going big, suck my dick
I'm going big, suck my dick


Too many niggas, not enough hoes
And some of you niggas, acting like hoes


I remember when I came out and shit
Man, it's been so long since they see my dick
Probably been five months since I seen my seed
Goddammit, K. Dot, when it come to this?
When I was sleeping on couches
Nigga couldn't get a call, just a Glock for my vouch
Nigga I was mothafuckin' out, yeah
With the flashing lights had me stuck like reindeer
When I should have been making bank, yeah
I was somewhere stuck where the flame is
Mothafucka, see how far that I came here
Went broke and I came up in the same year, can I get a hell yeah?
Drop my tear, hold my joy, show my pride
Music saved my fucking life, I'm doing right and you left behind
Feel my pain, now I'm styling, Hermès shit, I spent a thousand
Different homes, different islands
Dropped my mixtape and it sold like an album


Reason why I'm be going big, bitch, suck my dick
Yeah, I'm going big, bitch, suck my dick
Tell 'em I'm going big, bitch, suck my dick
Yeah, I'm going big, bitch, suck my dick (Yeah)


Too many niggas, not enough hoes
And some of you niggas, acting like hoes
Stay to myself like loners do
Get high by myself, I'm not in the mood
To politic or be fake with you
We apologize if you ever knew
Too many niggas, and not enough hoes
And most of you niggas, acting like hoes


Like hoes, like hoes, like hoes, like hoes
Like hoes, nigga actin like a hoe
Like hoes, like hoes, like hoes
You actin like a hoe, you actin like a hoe
You actin like a hoe, niggas actin like a hoe
Like hoes, like hoes, like hoes, like hoes



I remember you was conflicted, misusing your influence
Sometimes, I did the same


(Woman moaning)
If these walls could talk
If these walls could talk
If these walls could talk
If these walls could talk
If these walls could talk
If these walls could talk-
Sex


She just want to close her eyes and sway
With you, with you, with you
Exercise her right to work it out
It's true, it's true, it's true
Shout out to the birthday girls
Say hey (Hey), say hey (Hey), (Ah, girl)
Everyone deserves a night to play (Play)
She plays, only when you tell her no


If these walls could talk
I can feel your reign when it cries, gold lives inside of you
If these walls could talk
I love it when I’m in it, I love it when I’m in it


If these walls could talk, they’d tell me to swim good
No boat, I float better than he would
No life jacket, I’m not the God of Nazareth
But your flood can be misunderstood
Walls telling me they full of pain, resentment
Need someone to live in them just to relieve tension
Me, I’m just a tenant
Landlord said these walls vacant more than a minute
These walls are vulnerable, exclamation
Interior pink, color coordinated
I interrogated every nook and cranny
I mean, it's still amazing, before they couldn’t stand me
These walls want to cry tears
These walls happier when I’m here
These walls never could hold up
Every time I come around, demolition might crush


If these walls could talk
I can feel your reign when it cries, gold lives inside of you
If these walls could talk
I love it when I’m in it, I love it when I’m in it


If these walls could talk, they’d tell me to go deep
Yelling at me continuously, I can see
Your defense mechanism is my decision
Knock these walls down, that’s my religion
Walls feeling like they ready to close in
I suffocate, then catch my second wind
I resonate in these walls
I don’t know how long I can wait in these walls
I’ve been on the streets too long
Looking at you from the outside in
They sing the same old song
About how they walls always the cleanest
I beg to differ, I must’ve missed them
I’m not involved, I’d rather diss 'em
I’d rather call on you, put your wall up
'Cause when I come around, demolition gon’ crush


If these walls could talk
I can feel your reign when it cries, gold lives inside of you
If these walls could talk
I love it when I’m in it, I love it when I’m in it




If your walls could talk, they’d tell you it’s too late
Your destiny accepted your fate
Burn accessories and stash them on the yard
Take the recipe, the Bible and God
Wall telling you that commissary is low
Race wars happening, no calling CO
No calling your mother to save you
Homies to say you're irrepetible, not acceptable
Your behavior is Sammy the Bull like
A killer that turned snitch
Walls is telling me you a bitch
You pray for appeals hoping the warden would afford them
That sentence so important
Walls telling you to listen to Sing About Me
Retaliation is strong, you even dream 'bout me
Killed my homeboy and God spared your life
Dumb criminal got indicted same night
So when you play this song, rewind the first verse
About me abusing my power so you can hurt
About me and her in the shower whenever she horny
About me and her in the after hours of the morning
About her baby daddy currently serving life
And how she think about you until we meet up at night
About the only girl that cared about you when you asked her
And how she fuckin' on a famous rapper
Walls can talk (Talk)


I remember you was conflicted
Misusing your influence
Sometimes I did the same
Abusing my power, full of resentment
Resentment that turned into a deep depression
Found myself screaming in a hotel room
"Boarding completed I'd like to welcome you aboard flight number F2B3
Our scheduled flying time will be four hours and twenty minutes
And we will be cruising at an altitude of thirty-three-thousand feet
At this time we would like to acquaint you with some of the features
Relax and breathe normally"


Uh, coming down like I'm uphill
Hogging both lanes better than a bus will
She tell me that my head bigger than a bus wheel
But it don't matter cause she still gon' let me fuck still
I mix a little bit of Kendrick with some L.A. weather
Then step out like Chicago in its finest era
You niggas begging for attention, doing extra-extra
Downgrading yourself, you get an F for effort
Ha-ha, I let the world know
I chose to keep to myself and let the world go
And if you don't like a nigga, then let your girl know
So she can be curious on Twitter looking me up
I'm laid back with a bad one, you ain't never had one
Ass so fat that it tipped over the Aston
Speeding on the 1-0-5 till the fucking badge come
Hello to my wittiness, I'm Cadillac's grandson


And I'm a trip
Ever since an understudy man I've always been a trip
Mama tell me that she love me but she know her son a trip
Baby open up your ears, you ain't heard it like this
Sounwave drop the beat, I lock the flow down
Now all the way to the moon we bout to go now
I got enough of the mojo to go around
So pack your bags and tell him you going out of town
Cause I'm a trip


Landing on another runway, fly with me
Or die tryna fly, a shot-down Frisbee
Shout out to Black Hippy, nigga we on
Like we never been off, straight shots of Patron
I'm give y'all the business to give y'all some business
Pussy ain't shit, I can give y'all some bitches
Clean off her sports bra, she clean off my dishes
Then wear off the Kangols, hood rats, I hate those
And she know what this is, hey lil' mama
Seen your pretty ass around the way lil' mama
But why you always in somebody face lil' mama?
Embarrassing yourself, get off the stage (Lil Mama)
Nigga, I gotta be that nigga
If I ain't, I gotta beat that nigga
Curtesy of Paula's oldest son, pay homage
Or pay attention, open your eyes and hear knowledge


And I'm a trip
Ever since an understudy man I've always been a trip
Mama tell me that she love me but she know her son a trip
Baby open up your ears, you ain't heard it like this
Sounwave drop the beat, I lock the flow down
Now all the way to the moon we bout to go now
I got enough of the mojo to go around
So pack your bags and tell him you going out of town
Cause I'm a trip


Gi-give me that, gi-gi-give me that
That's how I get at 'em when I look at a shoe rack
Penny for thoughts, mine start at a few racks
So I can live on a hill just off a few raps
I want to live in a space that none of y'all can visit
That might be outer space, the Jupiter district
I quadruple my vision
If you don't see it then you're dead with your eyes open
I've seen bullets hit the wheel, left his ride smoking
On some Compton shit
Somebody that'll ride or die, that's a Compton bitch
You see my city is the city of Lamar
It'll take twenty years 'fore a nigga see them all
The swap meet dumping, the sawed-off pumping
The tree for the low, don't you know, Paul Bunyan
I'm on cloud nine, I can see rain coming
So if I'm out my mind, people don't say nothing


And I'm a trip
Ever since an understudy man I've always been a trip
Mama tell me that she love me but she know her son a trip
Baby open up your ears, you ain't heard it like this
Sounwave drop the beat, I lock the flow down
Now all the way to the moon we bout to go now
I got enough of the mojo to go around
So pack your bags and tell him you going out of town
Cause I'm a trip


"How was your flight Mr. Lamar?
Good, hope to see you next time"
I was sitting on the couch reading yellow paper
A letter in reply, 7 days later after I wrote 'em
"Stay strong, keep your faith in God," what I told him
Hoping that he's listening
Said that they tried to give him like a hundred years
What a coincidence, I was bumping some Plies
I can taste the salt from my tears
As the water had start to flood on my eyes
I know it gotta be hard being 21
Doing time in the pen and your Gram's old
Your brother's getting older
And the streets is getting colder
And your hoping that he's focused to stay on the right road
Sleeping in a cell, it's been 30 weeks
Ain't recieved any mail
It's cold and the hole stinks
And you can't even blink without niggas testing your life
As I read every word that you write, I can only imagine
Jason Keaton, I can only imagine


Life's about decisions man
It's in your hand and you got it
Just take control if you can
It's in your hand and you got it


Sitting on the couch, that was my Uncle Bobby
After he just got out, 15 years to count
Haven't seen the world in so long
Haven't seen a girl in so long
And before the sun came up, he was gone
Like a fiend off the best rock
Trying to get his life together, or what not
Typed his name in the system and they couldn't find his identity
Got it straight, got a place, found some serenity
Found a job, found his Mother's grave site, found a 40 ounce
Then he found God, then he bounced, then he found a new chick
Two kids, wide hips, found something in her we didn't see
Found this spot in Pasadena and shack with her, an investment
Then found guilty, somebody had yelled domestic
Violence on my Uncle, was working with two strikes
Only out a year, now facing life
I can only imagine
That's fucked up
I can only imagine, Uncle Bob


Life's about decisions man
It's in your hand and you got it
Just take control if you can
It's in your hand and you got it


Sitting on the couch, thinking about the ratio
Of blacks in prison as compact in prison
When blacks pack with minorities
System grab more of these 18 year olds
18 year sentence with no parole
The state won't oversee
They make the term severe, a conspiracy?
That's what I call it, it's full of shit
A toilet can help quick, the government help?
No, just put us on death row
Just give us some more guns, then give us some more coke
Then give us another chair, then give us some more rope
Then hang it like right there, yeah
It's justice for all but 90 percent unfair
Care? No
Alcatraz was purchased by a white man
For 5 grand, with intentions to expand
More prisons
So these correctionals ain't for rehabilitation
They for grossing a bigger business
Imagine
We're being used
Imagine
The truth shall be told


Life's about decisions man
It's in your hand and you got it
Just take control if you can
It's in your hand and you got it
Sometimes I want to leave, sometimes I want to cry
Sometimes I hate to bear the truth, sometimes I want to lie
Sometimes I want to school the youth, sometimes I want to ride
Sometimes I want to not think, sometimes I want to vibe
Sometimes I want to bump Tribe and zone out
This song's 'bout a young boy that's gone wild inside
When my world collide
With your world where your girl and your kids reside
We killed the facades, we feel free to fly
We're birds that reserve in the charismatic sky
I care about my pride too much
If my clothes is new, if my ride is plush
If my hair is cut, if my diamonds is crushed
I look in the mirror, I'm trendy enough? Wrong
Insecurity roams the black community
Homes where kids must have jewelry
The high school female need earrings and details
So she can be cool to be, amongst popularity
The various name brands that reached the price scan
It's not about the right price but more like the right scam
To rule us all, confuse us all
Hit the bank within five minutes and then withdraw
Now let's draw
The picture of a rapper with a chain and Range that is not paid for
My cousin from the South said he just bought him a house
That lives around his neck like a white collar
So why fast forward? then I'll rewind, a time machine can help me double back to slavery times
Picking cotton from a field that a white man own
The blacker you are, farther you're from the white man's home
Negro spiritual songs, gave us some type of sanity
Before your vanity, they parted our families
They put us in hundred degree shade and outside we bathed
The more we were afraid, the more they made rules
And trapped our minds in a cage, our freedom was so vague
Couldn't see it with the eyes of Tracee Ross (uh)
And school was exempt, see we couldn't have smarts
And a smirk could get you hurt, wounded first from a scar
400 years of nothing, 400 years of suffering
400 years of tears, and tribulations, miseducation
See what we facing is now coming back to the roots
Remember whips on our back and if we would run they would shoot
Called us niggers and figured that we never live in pursuit
Of happiness, we capture these feelings in things that we do
Thought of abstinence of slavery but we made it come to
About a perspective, my shoe selection gotta be Louie
Her hand bag gotta be Gucci, it's fake then she fool me
She still bad though, and her fake Gucci ain't that bad though
We filling up the gas for Rollies
Upgrade to 26's after riding Kobes
My cousin from the South, slavery start in the South and I bet ya
He overcompensates for the life of his ancestors
So blame it on the 400 years we never saw
The reason why the next 400 we gotta floss
Slaves


I said the 400 years we never had nothing
Barely had clothes on our back
Is the reason why when we get a little bit of change
We over exaggerate on our living expenses
So if you get your first big check and you cop a chain before you buy a house
You're a vanity slave
If you're a female and you got 4,5,6 rings on your finger
Four holes in your left ear and a nose piercing
You're a vanity slave
If you got an 02' Monte Carlo with 24's on it
And on the back of the window it says, "Get on my level ho"
You're a vanity slave

We're all vanity slaves, and with that being said
Can somebody please tell me where the mall at?
I'm not from around here, hey Ali, where we at? Idaho?
Yeah nigga, you know the first of the month, checks coming in
I'm tryna get some
What up?
It's like I don't think you fully understand who I am, ya know?
I'm just a good kid from Compton that wanna rap
I don't represent no colors, I represent my lil' sisters and brothers
I'm the oldest, nigga
And if you can't respect that, your whole perspective is wack
Check it out


I used to wanna rap like Jay-Z
Until I finally realized that Jay wasn't me
I took my time to jot down every line that's a quotable
Critics say I don't be killing this shit but I know I do
Because I used to practice early morning and then after school
I'm working on my hooks my nigga, I ain't tryna battle you
But even if I did, I guarantee I'd overshadow you
Like a fucked up taper that turned to bowl cut
I'mma close cut to Common and Gucci Mane
Now that's a comparison that you probably wouldn't understand
Because I can touch the people and still keep it ghetto
As an '87 Regal with the tree air freshener on the rearview mirror
I wear a heart on my shoulder
'Member when we used to make the boost look like Motorola?
Your cousin fucked up your room every time he came over
Then went to jail when we got older
That shit is a bad odor, but still I remain focused
In due time, I'll be able to swipe my card and it won't say decline
That shit's embarrassing huh
Hope no one pay you no mind
But it's a bad bitch behind you while you standing in line
Can you relate to my story? Can you follow my dreams
And admirations that I had ever since I was thirteen?
My momma believed in me, she let me use her van to go to the studio
Even though she know her tank is empty, that's who I do it fo'
My pops got a different approach, yeah he believed
But he always questioned when I'mma drop my debut CD
How long this gon' take nigga? You still haven't ate nigga
At twenty-two I had two cars and my own place nigga
It's a sacrifice I try to tell him
That's when he turn to BET and tell me that he jealous
Of all these niggas getting money and their shit don't sound like shit
I ain't tryna kill your confidence or forcing you to quit
I just wanna hear you heard


Yep, yep, that's my word
Make a statement with these nouns and verbs
I represent the liquor that's poured out on the curb
Listen to my nouns and verbs (Man, I wanna be heard)
Like a cattle with sheep
While y'all sleep I be up, cooking up all day
Like a mad scientist in that laboratory
Motherfuck what a critic got to say, I'ma be heard


What up DZYNE? I ain't forgot nigga
You developed me, telling me I was hot nigga
You believed in me first, that's what's for sure
At the church recording, at the garage, but it worked
But me and Dave kind of felt you lost the passion
A lot was going on in your life and you needed space
But still I should have came to you first to tell you what happened
But I was seventeen and figured it's best I stay away
And I was wrong, I was young and couldn't look you in the eye for what I'd done
But I'm telling you we ain't done
Matter of fact, how's your sons? What they up to?
Remember they used to run away while you had worked on ProTools?
People I used to be in the booth till four in the morning
With school in the morning, yawning, but I was on it
Me, you and Dave was on it
Buzzing like Charlotte Hornets when that tape dropped
Where them beats nigga? It's been five years since we had rocked
Time to be heard


Yep, yep, that's my word
Make a statement with these nouns and verbs
I represent the liquor that's poured out on the curb
Listen to my nouns and verbs (Man, I wanna be heard)
Like a cattle with sheep
While y'all sleep I be up, cooking up all day
Like a mad scientist in that laboratory
Motherfuck what a critic got to say, I'ma be heard


So can you feel it?
When you hear it do it pulsate your spirit?
Do it make you wanna say motherfuck a gimmick?
The truth can set you free if you Do the Right Thing
Word to Spike Lee, don't he look like Sounwave?
That's kinda random, but my humor sometimes strays
Like a dog in the night
Twenty-four hours in a day but only take five minutes
To grab a pad and a pen, then send your dog a kite
I spread love like a Hippy, but I'm a Black one
With Jesus Christ passion, I swear on the bible
Tabernacle to all my rivals, I ain't mad
You hate a nigga for tryna help you, that's your bad
Because I figure I can make a way with these stanzas
I probably can't heal cancer, but I can heal the city
My niggas, tell me you with me
And if you is won't you pop my CD in
Open up your trunk, then let it bump, so I can be heard
Yeah, uh huh


Yep, yep, that's my word
Make a statement with these nouns and verbs
I represent the liquor that's poured out on the curb
Listen to my nouns and verbs (Man, I wanna be heard)
Like a cattle with sheep
While y'all sleep I be up, cooking up all day
Like a mad scientist in that laboratory
Motherfuck what a critic got to say, I'ma be heard


D-Dave, what up nigga?
Matt Jeezy, hahaha...



Every nigga is a star, ayy, every nigga is a star
Every nigga is a star, ayy, every nigga is a star
Every nigga is a star, ayy
Who will deny that you and I and every nigga is a star?


Hit me!
When the four corners of this cocoon collide
You’ll slip through the cracks hopin' that you’ll survive
Gather your wit, take a deep look inside
Are you really who they idolize?
To pimp a butterfly


At first, I did love you
But now I just wanna fuck
Late nights thinkin' of you
Until I get my nut
Tossed and turned, lesson learned
You was my first girlfriend
Bridges burned, all across the board
Destroyed, but what for?


When I get signed, homie, I'ma act a fool
Hit the dance floor, strobe lights in the room
Snatch your little secretary bitch for the homies
Blue-eyed devil with a fat-ass monkey
I'ma buy a brand new Caddy on vogues
Chunk the hood up, two times, deuce-four
Platinum on everythin', platinum on weddin' ring
Married to the game and a bad bitch chose
When I get signed, homie, I'ma buy a strap
Straight from the CIA, set it on my lap
Take a few M-16s to the hood
Pass 'em all out on the block, what's good?
I'ma put the Compton swap meet by the White House
Republican run up, get socked out
Hit the press with a Cuban link on my neck
Uneducated, but I got a million-dollar check like that


We should never gave
We should never gave niggas money
Go back home, money, go back home
We should never gave
We should never gave niggas money
Go back home, money, go back home
(Everybody get out)


At first, I did love you (Love you)
But now I just wanna fuck (I just wanna fuck)
Late nights thinkin' of you (Of you)
Until I get my nut ('Til I get my nut)
Tossed and turned, lesson learned
You was my first girlfriend
Bridges burned, all across the board (Across the board)
Destroyed, but what for?


Yo, what's up? It's Dre
Remember the first time you came out to the house?
You said you wanted a spot like mine
But remember, anybody can get it
The hard part is keepin' it, motherfucker


What you want you? A house or a car?
Forty acres and a mule, a piano, a guitar?
Anythin', see, my name is Uncle Sam, I'm your dog
Motherfucker, you can live at the mall
I know your kind (That's why I'm kind)
Don't have receipts (Oh, man, that's fine)
Pay me later, wear those gators
Cliché? Then say, "Fuck your haters"
I can see the baller in you, I can see the dollar in you
Little white lies, but it's no white-collar in you
But it's whatever though because I'm still followin' you
Because you make me live forever, baby
Count it all together, baby
Then hit the register and make me feel better, baby
Your horoscope is a gemini, two sides
So you better cop everything two times
Two coupes, two chains, two C-notes
Too much ain't enough, both we know
Christmas, tell 'em what's on your wish list
Get it all, you deserve it, Kendrick
And when you hit the White House, do you
But remember, you ain't pass economics in school
And everything you buy, taxes will deny
I'll Wesley Snipe your ass before thirty-five


Yeah, lookin' down, it's quite a drop (It's quite a drop, drop, drop)
Lookin' good when you're on top (When you're on top, you got it)
You got a medal for us
Leavin' metaphors metaphysically in a state of euphoria
Look both ways before you cross my mind


We should never gave
We should never gave niggas money
Go back home, money, go back home
We should never gave
We should never gave niggas money
Go back home, money, go back home


Tax man comin', tax man comin'
Tax man comin', tax man comin'
Tax man comin', tax man comin'
Tax man comin', tax man comin'
America, God bless you if it's good to you
America, please take my hand
Can you help me underst—
New Kung Fu Kenny!


Throw a steak off the ark to a pool full of sharks, he'll take it
Leave him in the wilderness with a sworn nemesis, he'll make it
Take the gratitude from him, I bet he'll show you somethin', whoa
I'll chip a nigga lil' bit of nothin', I'll chip a nigga lil' bit of nothin'
I'll chip a nigga lil' bit of nothin', I'll chip a nigga, then throw the blower in his lap
Walk myself to the court like, "Bitch, I did that!," X-rated
Johnny don't wanna go to school no mo', no mo'
Johnny said books ain't cool no mo' (No mo')
Johnny wanna be a rapper like his big cousin
Johnny caught a body yesterday out hustlin'
God bless America, you know we all love him


Yesterday I got a call like from my dog like 101
Said they killed his only son because of insufficient funds
He was sobbin', he was mobbin', way belligerent and drunk
Talkin' out his head, philosophin' on what the Lord had done
He said: "K-Dot, can you pray for me?
It been a fucked up day for me
I know that you anointed, show me how to overcome."
He was lookin' for some closure
Hopin' I could bring him closer
To the spiritual, my spirit do know better, but I told him
"I can't sugarcoat the answer for you, this is how I feel:
If somebody kill my son, that mean somebody gettin' killed."
Tell me what you do for love, loyalty, and passion of
All the memories collected, moments you could never touch
I'll wait in front a nigga's spot and watch him hit his block
I'll catch a nigga leavin' service if that's all I got
I'll chip a nigga, then throw the blower in his lap
Walk myself to the court like, "Bitch, I did that!"
Ain't no Black Power when your baby killed by a coward
I can't even keep the peace, don't you fuck with one of ours
It be murder in the street, it be bodies in the hour
Ghetto bird be on the street, paramedics on the dial
Let somebody touch my momma
Touch my sister, touch my woman
Touch my daddy, touch my niece
Touch my nephew, touch my brother
You should chip a nigga, then throw the blower in his lap
Matter fact, I'm 'bout to speak at this convention
Call you back—


Alright, kids, we're gonna talk about gun control
(Pray for me) Damn!


It's not a place
This country is to me a sound
Of drum and bass
You close your eyes to look around


Hail Mary, Jesus and Joseph
The great American flag is wrapped in drag with explosives
Compulsive disorder, sons and daughters
Barricaded blocks and borders
Look what you taught us!
It's murder on my street, your street, back streets
Wall Street, corporate offices
Banks, employees, and bosses with
Homicidal thoughts; Donald Trump's in office
We lost Barack and promised to never doubt him again
But is America honest, or do we bask in sin?
Pass the gin, I mix it with American blood
Then bash him in, you Crippin' or you married to Blood?
I'll ask again—oops, accident
It's nasty when you set us up
Then roll the dice, then bet us up
You overnight the big rifles, then tell Fox to be scared of us
Gang members or terrorists, et cetera, et cetera
America's reflections of me, that's what a mirror does


It's not a place
This country is to me a sound
Of drum and bass
You close your eyes to look ar—
New shit, new Kung Fu Kenny


I got so many theories and suspicions
I'm diagnosed with real nigga conditions
Today is the day I follow my intuition
Keep the family close—get money, fuck bitches
I double parked the Aston in the red
My momma told me that I'ma work myself to death
My girl told me don't let these hoes get in my head
My world been ecstatic, I checked the signal that read—


Buzzin', radars is buzzin'
Yah, yah, yah, yah
Yah, yah, yah, yah, yah, yah
Buzzin', radars is buzzin'
Yah, yah, yah, yah
Yah, yah, yah, yah, yah, yah


Interviews wanna know my thoughts and opinions
Fox News wanna use my name for percentage
My latest muse is my niece, she worth livin'
See me on the TV and scream: "That's Uncle Kendrick!"
Yeah, that's the business (Uno)
Somebody tell Geraldo this nigga got some ambition
I'm not a politician, I'm not 'bout a religion
I'm a Israelite, don't call me black no mo'
That word is only a color, it ain't facts no mo'
My cousin called, my cousin Carl Duckworth
Said know my worth
And Deuteronomy say that we all been cursed
I know He walks the Earth
But it's money to get, bitches to hit, yah
Zeroes to flip, temptation is, yah
First on my list, I can't resist, yah
Everyone together now, know that we forever—


Buzzin', radars is buzzin'
Yah, yah, yah, yah
Yah, yah, yah, yah, yah, yah
Buzzin', radars is buzzin'
Yah, yah, yah, yah
Yah, yah, yah, yah, yah, yah


Study long, study wrong, nigga
Hey, y'all close that front door, y'all let flies in this motherfucker
Close that door!
My OG up in this motherfucker right now
My pops man with the bottle of Hennessy in his hand, actin' a fool
Hey, hey, babe, check it out, I'ma tell you what my mama had said, she like:


I could spot you a mile away
I could see your insecurities written all on your face
So predictable your words, I know what you gonna say
Who you foolin'? Oh, you assuming you can just come and hang
With the homies but your level of realness ain't the same
Circus acts only attract those that entertain
Small talk, we know that it's all talk
We live in the Laugh Factory every time they mention your name


Askin' "where the hoes at?" to impress me
Askin' "where the moneybags?" to impress me
Say you got the burner stashed to impress me
It's all in your head, homie
Askin' "where the plug at?" to impress me
Askin' "where the juug at?" to impress me
Askin' "where it's at?" only upsets me
You sound like the feds, homie


You ain't gotta lie to kick it, my nigga
You ain't gotta lie, you ain't gotta lie
You ain't gotta lie to kick it, my nigga
You ain't gotta try so hard
You ain't gotta lie to kick it, my nigga
You ain't gotta lie, you ain't gotta lie
You ain't gotta lie to kick it, my nigga
You ain't gotta try so hard


And the world don't respect you
And the culture don't accept you
But you think it's all love
And the girls gon' neglect you once your parody is done
Reputation can't protect you if you never had one
Jealousy (complex), emotional (complex)
Self-pity (complex), under oath (complex)
The loudest one in the room, nigga, that's a complex
Let me put it back in proper context


You ain't gotta lie to kick it, my nigga
You ain't gotta lie, you ain't gotta lie
You ain't gotta lie to kick it, my nigga
You ain't gotta try so hard
You ain't gotta lie to kick it, my nigga
You ain't gotta lie, you ain't gotta lie
You ain't gotta lie to kick it, my nigga
You ain't gotta try so hard


Askin' "where the hoes at?" to impress me
Askin' "where the moneybags?" to impress me
Say you got the burner stashed to impress me
It's all in your head, homie
Askin' "where the plug at?" to impress me
Askin' "where the juug at?" to impress me
Askin' "where it's at?" only upsets me
You sound like the feds, homie

(Pause)


What do you got to offer?
Tell me before we off ya, put you deep in the coffin
Been allergic to talkin', been a virgin to bullshit
And sell a dream in the auction, tell me just who your boss is
Niggas be fugazi, bitches be fugazi
This is for fugazi
Niggas and bitches who make habitual lyin' babies
Bless them little hearts
You can never persuade me
You can never relate me to him, to her, or that to them
Or you, the truth you love to bend
In the back, in the bed, on the floor, that's your ho
On the couch, in the mouth, I'll be out, really though
So loud, rich niggas got low money
And loud, broke niggas got no money
The irony behind it is so funny
And I seen it all this past year
Pass on some advice we feel:


You ain't gotta lie to kick it, my nigga
You ain't gotta lie, you ain't gotta lie
You ain't gotta lie to kick it, my nigga
You ain't gotta try so hard
You ain't gotta lie to kick it, my nigga
You ain't gotta lie, you ain't gotta lie
You ain't gotta lie to kick it, my nigga
You ain't gotta try so hard




Mass hallucination, baby
Ill education, baby
Want to reconnect with your elations?
This is your station, baby


Look inside these walls and you see I'm havin' withdrawals
Of a prisoner on his way
Trapped inside your desire to fire bullets that stray
Track attire just tell you I'm tired and ran away
I should ask a choir: "What do you require
To sing a song that acquire me to have faith?"
As the record spin I should pray
For the record, I recognize that I'm easily prey
I got ate alive yesterday
I got animosity buildin', it's prob'ly big as a buildin'
Me jumpin' off of the roof is me just playin' it safe
But what am I 'posed to do when the topic is red or blue
And you understand that I ain't
But know I'm accustomed to just a couple that look for trouble
And live in the street with rank
No better picture to paint than me walkin' from bible study
And called his homies because he had said he noticed my face
From a function that tooken place, they was wonderin' if I bang
Step on my neck and get blood on your Nike checks
I don't mind 'cause one day you'll respect
The good kid, m.A.A.d city


Mass hallucination, baby
Ill education, baby
Want to reconnect with your elations?
This is your station, baby


All I see is strobe lights, blindin' me in my hindsight
Findin' me by myself, promise me you can help
In all honesty I got time to be copacetic until
You had finally made decision to hold me against my will
It was like a head-on collision that folded me standing still
I can never pick out the difference and grade a cop on the bill
Every time you clock in the morning, I feel you just want to kill
All my innocence while ignorin' my purpose to persevere
As a better person; I know you heard this and probably in fear
But what am I 'posed to do when the blinkin' of red and blue
Flash from the top of your roof and your dog has to say woof
And you ask: "Lift up your shirt," because you wonder if a tattoo
Of affiliation can make it a pleasure to put me through
Gang files, but that don't matter because the matter is racial profile
I heard 'em chatter: "He's prob'ly young, but I know that he's down
Step on his neck as hard as your bullet-proof vest
He don't mind, he know we'll never respect
The good kid, m.A.A.d. city."


Mass hallucination, baby
Ill education, baby
Want to reconnect with your elations?
This is your station, baby


All I see in this room: 20's, Xannies and these 'shrooms
Grown-up candy for pain, can we live in a sane
Society? It's entirely stressful upon my brain
You hired me as a victim, I quietly hope for change
When violence is the rhythm, inspired me to obtain
The silence in this room with 20's, Xannies and 'shrooms
Some grown-up candy, I lost it, I feel it's nothin' to lose
The streets sure to release the worst side of my best
Don't mind, 'cause now you ever in debt to good kid, m.A.A.d. city


Mass hallucination, baby
Ill education, baby
Want to reconnect with your elations?
This is your station, babyJanuary:Albums:Weezer (Teal Album)
Bring Me the Horizon - amo
Death Grips - Bottomless Pit
Alison Wonderland - Awake
The Killers - Wonderful Wonderful
Halsey - Badlands
Lorde - Melodrama
Forgive Durden - Razia's Shadow: A Musical
System of a Down - Toxicity
XXXTentacion - Members Only V4
KIDS SEE GHOSTS Self-Titled
Imagine Dragons - Origins
Singles:Set It Off - Midnight Thoughts
Noname - Song 31
Unkle Adams - Original
Unkle Adams - Original 2
Bring Me the Horizon - medicine
Axl Rose - Rock the Rock
Lana Del Ray - hope is a dangerous thing...
cupcakKe  - Squidward Nose
Sam Smith & Normani - Dancing with a Stranger
Gesaffelstein - Lost in the Fire (feat. The Weeknd)
Ariana Grande - 7 rings
Bring Me the Horizon - mother tongue
twenty one pilots - Chlorine
J. Cole - Middle Child
Billie Eilish - bury a friend
Stella Donnelly - Lunch
Lil Peep & ILoveMakonnen - I've Been Waiting (feat. Fall Out Boy)
Poppy - Voicemail
Shofu - The Ultimate Super Smash Bros. Cypher 2018
Panic! at the Disco - The Greatest Show
Noisestorm - Crab Rave
Travis Scott - Sicko Mode
Froggy Fresh - The Baddest
Kusorare - Dicko Mode
Post Malone & Swae Lee - Sunflower
Pitbull - Ocean to Ocean
6ix9ine - BEBE (feat. Anuel AA)
Lil Peep & XXXTENTACION - Falling Down
The Chainsmokers - Everybody Hates Me
Clean Bandit - Rockabye
Lil Dicky - Freaky Friday (feat. Chris Brown)
XXXTentacion - BAD!
Imagine Dragons - Bad Liar
Billie Eilish - come out and play
Sheck Wes - Mo Bamba
XXXTentacion - SAUCE!
EPs:Dodie - Human
IDKHOW - 1981 Extended Play
Gang of Youths - Let Me Be Clear
February:Albums:Set It Off - Midnight
Ariana Grande - thank u, next
Jessica Pratt - Quiet Signs
Xiu Xiu - Girl with Basket of Fruit
Ladytron Self-Titled
Avril Lavigne - Head Above Water
Lil Pump - Harverd Dropout
Julia Jacklin - Crushing
Mariah Carey - Caution
Weezer (Blue Album)
XXXTentacion - 17
Death Grips - Fashion Week
Singles:Ariana Grande - 7 rings (Remix) 
twenty one pilots - Chlorine (Alt Mix)
Ariana Grande - break up with your girlfriend, i'm bored
P!nk - Walk Me Home
Carly Rae Jepsen - Now That I Found You
Carly Rae Jepsen - No Drug Like Me
Zedd - The Middle (feat. Marin Morris & Grey)
Zedd - Stay
Zedd - Get Low
Zedd - Happy Now (feat. Elley Duhé)
Death Grips - Guillotine
Death Grips - Streaky
Death Grips - Flies
Death Grips - Ha Ha Ha
Mariah Carey - GTFO
DJ Snake - Taki Taki (feat. Cardi B, Ozuna & Selena Gomez)
George Ezra - Shotgun
Bebe Rexha - Meant to Be (feat. Florida Georgia Line)
Halsey - Without Me
Pinkfong - Baby Shark
Bruno Mars - Finesse (Remix) 
Bruno Mars & Cardi B - Please Me
Zedd & Katy Perry - 365
John Denver - Take Me Home, Country Roads
Death Grips - Takyon
EPs:Pornhub's Valentines Day Album
March:Albums:Weezer (Black Album)
Little Simz - GREY Area
Solange - When I Get Home
Dave - Psychodrama
Stella Donnelly - Beware of the Dogs
Sigrid - Sucker Punch
Foals - Everything Not Saved Will Be Lost (Pt. 1)
American Football Third Self-Titled
Kankyō Ongaku: Japanese Ambient, Environmental & New Age Music 1980-1990
Rich White Man - The Rich White Man
Maroon 5 - Red Pill Blues
The Shaggs - Philosophy of the World
Godspeed You! Black Emperor - Lift Your Skinny Fists like Antennas to Heaven
Radiohead - OK Computer
Sabaton - The Last Stand
Weezer - Raditude
Billie Eilish - WHEN WE ALL FALL ASLEEP? WHERE DO WE GO?
Nilüfer Yanya - Miss Universe
Jenny Lewis - On the Line
Weezer (White Album)
Singles:Jonas Brothers - Sucker
Billie Eilish - wish you were gay
Ava Max - So Am I
cupcakKe - Bird Box
Khalid - My Bad
Georgia Twinn - My Bad
Schoolboy Q - Numb Numb Juice
Iggy Azelea - Sally Walker
Big Baller B - Welcome to the Black Parade (Cover)
Big Baller B - I Fucked Yo Bitch on a Yacht
Big Baller B - I Took Yo Bitch to the Dentist
Big Baller B - Is That Yo Girl?
Death Grips - electronic drum solo dub mix (single take)
Charlie Puth - Attention
Bill Wurtz - Might Quit
Kanye West - Monster (feat. Jay-Z, Rick Ross, Bon Iver, & Nicki Minaj)
Lady Gaga & Bradley Cooper - Shallow
Billie Eilish - Lovely (feat. Khalid)
Lukas Graham - 7 Years
Lukas Graham - Love Someone
Weezer - Feels Like Summer
Stella Donnelly - Boys Will Be Boys
Doja Cat - MOOO!
Gorillaz - DoYaThing
Sabaton - The Last Stand
Benny Blanco & Tainy - I Can't Get Enough (feat. Selena Gomez & J Balvin)
Radiohead - Paranoid Android
Radiohead - No Surprises
Radiohead - Lucky
Joey Bada$$ - 500 Benz
Juice WRLD - All Girls are the Same
Juice WRLD - Roberry
Kendrick Lamar - untitled 07 – 2014 - 2016 (Levitate)
Dua Lipa - Hotter Than Hell
EPs:Sigrid - Don't Kill My Vibe
Sigrid - Raw
an Unkindness - 4 Songs
April:Albums:Earl Sweatshirt - Some Rap Songs
Neutral Milk Hotel - In the Aeroplane Over the Sea
Weezer (Red Album)
Meghan Trainor - Thank You
Tyler, the Creator - Flower Boy
Dua Lipa Self-Titled
MARINA - LOVE
Weyes Blood - Titanic Rising
Lady Lamb - Even in the Tremor
Annoying Orange - Emoji Raps
Lizzo - Cuz I Love You
Jade Bird Self-Titled
Aries - WELCOME HOME
Kevin Abstract - ARIZONA BABY
Jack Stauber - Pop Food
AJR - Neotheater
Singles:PewDiePie - Congratulations
Elon Musk - Harambe
Ariana Grande & Victoria Monét - MONOPOLY
The Boyboy West Coast - U Was at the Club
Alison Wonderland - Peace
Weyes Blood - Andromeda
Lady Lamb - Deep Love
Weezer - Buddy Holly
Weezer - Undone - The Sweater Song
Weezer - Say It Ain't So
Lil Nas X - Old Town Road
Lil Nas X - Old Town Road (Remix) 
Madonna, Maluma - Medellín
ScHoolboy Q - CHopstix (feat. Travis Scott)
Carly Rae Jepsen - Julien
Lil Dicky - Earth
Jack Stauber - Two Time
Cal Chuchesta - Best Teef? (feat. Anthony Fantano)
The Boyboy West Coast - U Was at the Club (Bottoms Up)
Jack Stauber - Two Time
Miraei - Lolicons
Kevin Abstract - Baby Boy
ARIES - BAD NEWS
Hopsin - Happy Ending
Charlie Puth - Marvin Gaye
D4NNY - Goodbye
Martin Garrix - Summer Days (feat. Macklemore and Patrick Stump)
Tana Mongeau - Fuck Up
Martinez Twins - That's My Lambo
Jojo Siwa - Boomerang
LaurDIY - DIY Queen
Danielle Cohn - Marilyn Monroe
Tay Zonday - Chocolate Rain
Jenna Marbles - Everything Is Glue
Keemstar - Dollar in the Woods!
Gabbie Hanna - Monster
SkyDoesMinecraft - New World
Tessa Brooks & Erika Costell - Powerful Emotions
Haschak Sisters - Daddy Says No
Cimorelli & James Charles - Never Enough
GABI - Yacht
TomSka - The Muffin Song
iHasCupquake - Touching Butts!
Jake Paul - I'm Single
Shane Dawson - SUPERLUV
Brizzy Voices - Voice All the Pokemon (Dubstep Remix)
Rebecca Zamolo - Slime Workout
Nicole Arbour - Show Me How You Werk
Julian Smith - I Wish I Was a Black Guy
The Stupendium - Why Did I Say Okie Doki? (Orchestral Remix)
AJR - Birthday Party
AJR - 100 Bad Days
AJR - Dear Winter
Erika Costell - Thots Not Feelings
EPs:BTS - MAP OF THE SOUL: PERSONA
Kevin Abstract - ARIZONA baby
Kevin Abstract - Ghettobaby
KnifeTrick - NOT PROJECT
Weezer (White Album) 
May:Albums:The Holderness Family - The Greatest Hits
Weezer - Make Believe
Weezer - Maladroit
Muse - Simulation Theory
Weezer (Green Album)
Weezer - Pinkerton
Weezer - Hurley
Weezer - Everything Will Be Alright in the End
Tyler, the Creator - IGOR
Carly Rae Jepsen - Dedicated
Alex Lahey - The Best of Luck Club
Sticky Fingers - Land of Pleasure
Russ - Zoo
Faye Webster - Atlanta Millionaires Club
Poppy - Am I a Girl?
Steve Lacy - Apollo XXI
Morrissey - California Son
Mac DeMarco - Here Comes the Cowboy
pronoun - i'll show you stronger
Hayden Thorpe - Diviner
Singles:Graveyardguy - Final Girl
Bibi H. - How It Is (Wap Bap...)
Jack Douglass - Raping vs. Rapping
Muse - Pressure
Big Baller B - Hookada Bookada (feat. Lil Mosquito Disease)
Ricegum - Fortnite n Chill
The Backpack Kid - The Floss
Bill Wurtz - Mount St. Helens is About to Blow Up
Chad Tepper -Malibu
Mr Miln - I Skipped School to Play Fortnite
Jeffy - Why?
Norris Nuts - We the #Legends
The Warp Zone - Steak and a BJ Day Song
King Bach - Gottem
CG5 - I Can't Fix You
Deji - No L's
Anthony Padilla - Straight Man Party Anthem
Logic - Homicide
Weezer - Mexican Fender
Weezer - Beach Boys
Weezer - Feels Like Summer
Ed Sheeran & Justin Bieber - I Don't Care
Ricegum - It's Every Night Sis
JT Music - Cuphead Rap
FKA twigs - In Time
Big Baller B - Old Town Road 2 (feat. Lil Mosquito Disease)
Mac DeMarco - Nobody
Mac DeMarco - On the Square
Mac DeMarco - All of Our Yesterdays
Weezer - Memories
Big Baller B - B
Faye Webster - Room Temperature
Faye Webster - Right Side of My Neck
Faye Webster - Kingston
Faye Webster - Flowers (feat. Father)
Poppy - In a Minute
Poppy - Fashion After All
Poppy - Time is Up
Poppy - Hard Feelings
Poppy - X
Coolio - Gangsta's Paradise
Halsey - Nightmare
Morrissey - Wedding Bell Blues
Rich Gang - Lifestyle
Big Baller B - Washed Up
American Football - Never Meant
Steve Lacy - N Side
Morrissey - Wedding Bell Blues
Poppy - Scary Mask
Herve Pagez & Diplo - Spicy (feat. Charli XCX)
EPs:Weezer - Christmas with Weezer
Billy Cobb - Zerwee
June:Albums:Big Baller B - Big Baller Paradise
Poppy - Poppy.Computer
Weezer - Pacific Daydream
Backstreet Boys - DNA
Denzel Curry - ZUU
Jonas Brothers - Happiness Begins
Radiohead - In Rainbows
Foster the People - Torches
Pkt. - True Sight
Muse - Absolution
Owl City - The Midsummer Station
Kero Kero Bonito - Bonito Generation
Kero Kero Bonito - Time 'n' Place
Garrett Williamson - The Beat Demon
Singles:Weezer - Everybody Needs Salvation
Cardi B - Press
Blink-182 - Blame It On My Youth
Famous Dex - Hoes Mad
Lil Karat Stixx - I'm So Lit
Poppy - I'm Poppy
Poppy - Computer Boy
Poppy - Let's Make a Video
Poppy - Interweb
Poppy - My Style
Poppy - Bleach Blonde Baby
Poppy - Moshi Moshi
BTS - Dream Glow (feat. Charli XCX)
Denzel Curry - RICKY
Big Baller B - Departure
Submarine Man - Stinko Foot
Radiohead - House of Cards / Bodysnatchers
Radiohead - Jigsaw Falling into Place
Radiohead - Reckoner
Radiohead - Nude
Submarine Man - Socky
Oliver Tree - Miracle Man
Oliver Tree - Hurt
Foster the People - Helena Beat
Foster the People - Pumped Up Kicks
Foster the People - Call it What You Want
Foster the People - Don't Stop (Color on the Walls)
Foster the People - Houdini
Submarine Man - Submarine Boy Rules
Muse - Time is Running Out
Muse - Sing For Absolution
Muse - Stockholm Syndrome
Muse - Hysteria
Muse - Butterflies And Hurricanes
Joji - Sanctuary
Taylor Swift - You Need to Calm Down
Kero Kero Bonito - Only Acting
Poppy - Choke
Conan Gray - Checkmate
João Santos - Yeah Yeah
Marshmello - Rescue Me (feat. A Day to Remember)
EPs:Miley Cyrus - SHE IS COMING
July:Albums:Thom Yorke - ANIMA
Blink-182 - Enema of the State
Otoboke Beaver - Itekoma Hits
black midi - schlagenheim
Freddie Gibbs & Madlib - Bandana
Jaden - ERYS
Big Baller B & Lil Mosquito Disease - Swarm
Ed Sheeran - No.6 Collaborations Project
Vanessa Hudgens - V
Submarine Man - Barefoot Worlds
Banks - III
Peppa Pig - My First Album
Radiohead - Kid A
My Little Pony - Equestria Girls - Rainbow Rocks (OMPS)
Singles:Blink-182 - Happy Days
Ava Max - So Am I (feat. NCT 127)
Aries - AMY'S GRAVE
Aries - SANTA MONICA
Aries - CAROUSEL
Avril Lavigne - What the Hell
Stevie Wonder - I Just Call To Say I Love You
Blink-182 - What's My Age Again
Blink-182 & Lil Wayne - What’s My Age Again? / A Milli
Weezer - Keep Fishin'
Blink-182 - Happy Days
Big Baller B - Don't Keep No Useless Women
Big Baller B - I Got Clout
Big Baller B - I'm The Shit
Billie Eilish & Justin Bieber - Bad Guy (Remix)
Lil Nas X & Billy Ray Cyrus feat. Young Thug & Mason Ramsey - Old Town Road (Remix)
Weezer - Hang On
The All-American Rejects - Gives You Hell
Avenade - The World Has Turned and Left Me Here
Paramore - Still Into You
Big Baller B & Lil Mosquito Disease - Flex Gang
Ed Sheeran - Antisocial
Fallen Vengeance - Seven Nation Army
Shawn Mendes & Camila Cabello - Señorita
Danielle Cohn - Mi Amor
Weezer - Weekend Woman
Weezer - The Greatest Man That Ever Lived
Acreativename - random song i made when i was bored
Oh - Box
Avenade - Closed Fists and Battle Antics
KnifeTrick - Eel
Acreativename - another random song i made when i was bored
EPs:Poppy - Choke
FEVER 333 - Made an America
Lil Nas X - 7
Death Grips - Gmail and the Restraining Orders
Avenade - Not Only Does It Suck, but It Also Isn't Real
SamuraiBird - Bees EP
Avenade - You'd Think So but You'd Be Wrong
Oh - Oh


If Pirus and Crips all got along
They'd probably gun me down by the end of this song
Seem like the whole city go against me
Every time I'm in the street, I hear—
Yawk! Yawk! Yawk! Yawk!


Man down, where you from, nigga?
Fuck who you know—where you from, my nigga?
Where your grandma stay, huh, my nigga?
This m.A.A.d city I run, my nigga


Brace yourself, I'll take you on a trip down memory lane
This is not a rap on how I'm slingin' crack or move cocaine
This is cul-de-sac and plenty Cognac and major pain
Not the drill sergeant, but the stress that weighin' on your brain
It was me, L Boog, and Yan Yan, YG Lucky ride down Rosecrans
It got ugly, wavin' yo' hand out the window – check yourself!
Uh, Warriors and Conans, hope euphoria can slow dance
With society, the driver seat the first one to get killed
Seen a light-skinned nigga with his brains blown out
At the same burger stand where *beep* hang out
Now this is not a tape recorder sayin' that he did it
But ever since that day, I was lookin' at him different
That was back when I was nine, Joey packed the nine
Pakistan on every porch is fine, we adapt to crime
Pack a van with four guns at a time
With the sliding door, fuck is up?
Fuck you shootin' for if you ain't walkin' up, you fuckin' punk?
Pickin' up the fuckin' pump, pickin' off you suckers
Suck a dick or die or sucker punch
A wall of bullets comin' from AK's, AR's, "Ayy, y'all—duck!"
That's what Momma said when we was eatin' that free lunch
Aw man, goddamn, all hell broke loose
You killed my cousin back in '94, fuck yo' truce!
Now crawl your head in that noose
You wind up dead on the news
Ain't no peace treaty, just piecin' BGs up to pre-approve
Bodies on top of bodies, IVs on top of IVs
Obviously the coroner between the sheets like the Isleys
When you hop on that trolley, make sure your color's correct
Make sure you're corporate or they'll be callin' your mother collect
They say the governor collect all of our taxes, except
When we in traffic and tragic happens, that shit ain't no threat
You movin' backwards if you suggest that you sleep with a TEC
Go buy a chopper and have a doctor on speed dial, I guess
M.A.A.d. city


Man down, where you from, nigga?
Fuck who you know—where you from, my nigga?
Where your grandma stay, huh, my nigga?
This m.A.A.d city I run, my nigga


If Pirus and Crips all got along
They'd probably gun me down by the end of this song
Seem like the whole city go against me
Every time I'm in the street, I hear—
Yawk! Yawk! Yawk!—




Wake yo' punk-ass up!
It ain't nothin' but a Compton thang
G-yeah, real simple and plain
Let me teach you some lessons about the street
(Smoke somethin', nigga!)
Hood ('Sup, Cuz?)
It ain't nothin' but a Compton thang
G-yeah, how we do


Fresh outta school 'cause I was a high school grad'
Sleepin' in the living room of my momma's pad
Reality struck, I seen the white car crash
Hit the light pole, two niggas hopped out on foot and dashed
My pops said I needed a job, I thought I believed him
Security guard for a month and ended up leavin'
In fact, I got fired, 'cause I was inspired by all of my friends
To stage a robbery the third Saturday I clocked in
Projects tore up, gang signs get thrown up
Cocaine laced in marijuana
And they wonder why I rarely smoke now
Imagine if your first blunt had you foamin' at the mouth
I was straight tweakin', the next weekend we broke even
I made allegiance that made a promise to see you bleedin'
You know the reasons but still will never know my life
Kendrick a.k.a. "Compton's Human Sacrifice"


G-yeah, cocaine, weed
Niggas been mixin' shit since the '80s, loc
Sherm sticks, butt-nakeds
Dip, make a nigga flip
Cluck heads all up and down the block and shit
One time's crooked and shit
Block a nigga in
Alondra, Rosecrans, Bullis, it's Compton


I'm still in the hood, loc, yeah that's cool
Shit, the hood took me under, so I follow the rules
But yeah, that's like me, I grew up in the hood where they bang
And niggas that rep colors is doin' the same thang
Pass it to the left so I can smoke on me
A couple drive-bys in the hood lately, shit
Couple of IV's with the fuckin' spray-can
Shots in the crowd, then everybody ran
Crew I'm finna slay, the street life I crave
Shots hit the enemy, hearts turn brave
Mount up, regulators in the whip
Down the boulevard with the pistol grip, yeah
Trip, we in the hood still
So, loc, grab a strap 'cause yeah, it's so real, yeah
Deal with the outcome, a strap in the hand
And a bird and ten grand's where a mothafucka stand


If I told you I killed a nigga at sixteen, would you believe me?
Perceive me to be innocent Kendrick you seen in the street
With a basketball and some Now and Laters to eat?
If I mentioned all of my skeletons, would you jump in the seat?
Would you say my intelligence now is great relief?
And it's safe to say that our next generation maybe can sleep
With dreams of bein' a lawyer or doctor
Instead of boy with a chopper that hold the cul-de-sac hostage
Kill 'em all if they gossip
The Children of the Corn, they vandalizin' the option
Of livin' a lie, drown their body with toxins
Constantly drinkin' and drive
Hit the powder, then watch this flame that arrive in his eye
Listen, coward, the concept is aim and then bang it and slide
Out that bitch with deposit, a price on his head, the tithes
Probably go to the projects, I
Live inside the belly of the rough, Compton, USA
Made me an Angel on Angel Dust - what?


M.A.A.d city
Compton


Nigga, pass Dot the bottle, damn!
You ain't the one that got fucked up
What you holdin' it for?
Niggas always actin' unsensitive and shit
Nigga, that ain't no word
Nigga, shut up!
Hey, Dot, you good, my nigga?
Don't even trip
Just lay back and drink that
*Screaming*


Loving you is complicated, loving you is complicated
Loving you is complicated, loving you is complicated
Loving you is complicated, loving you is complicated
Loving you is complicated, loving you is complicated
Loving you is complicated, loving you is complicated


I place blame on you still, place shame on you still
Feel like you ain't shit, feel like you don't feel
Confidence in yourself, breakin' on marble floors
Watchin' anonymous strangers, tellin' me that I'm yours
But you ain't shit, I'm convinced your tolerance nothin' special
What can I blame you for? Nigga, I can name several
Situations, I'll start with your little sister bakin'
A baby inside, just a teenager, where your patience?
Where was your antennas?
Where was the influence you speak of?
You preached in front of one-hunnid-thousand but never reached her
I fuckin' tell you fuckin' failure—you ain't no leader!
I never liked you, forever despise you—I don't need ya!
The world don't need ya, don't let them deceive ya
Numbers lie too, fuck your pride too, that's for dedication
Thought money would change you, made you more complacent
Fuckin' hate you, I hope you embrace it, I swear—


Loving you is complicated, loving you is complicated
Loving you is complicated, loving you is complicated
Loving you is complicated, loving you is complicated
Loving you is complicated, loving you is complicated
Loving you is complicated, loving you is complicated


Lovin' you, lovin' you, not lovin' you, 100° proof
I can feel your vibe and recognize that you're ashamed of me
Yes, I hate you, too


(Loving you ain't really complicated)
"Housekeeping, housekeeping"
(What I got to do to get to you?)
"¡Abre la puerta! ¡Abre la puerta tengo que limpiar el cuarto!"
(To you)
"¡Es que no hay mucho tiempo tengo que limpiar el cuarto!"
(Loving you ain't really complicated)
"¡Disculpe!"
(What I got to do to get to you?)
(To you)




Are you the reason why mom and them leavin'
No, you ain't shit, you say you love 'em, I know you don't mean it
I know you irresponsible, selfish, in denial, can't help it
Your trials and tribulations a burden, everyone felt it
Everyone heard it, multiple shots, corners cryin' out
You was deserted, where was your antennas again?
Where was your presence? Where was your support that you pretend?
You ain’t no brother, you ain’t no disciple, you ain’t no friend
A friend never leave Compton for profit, or leave his best friend, little brother
You promised you’d watch him before they shot him
Where was your antennas? On the road, bottles and bitches
You FaceTimed him one time, that's unforgiven
You even FaceTimed instead of a hospital visit
Guess you thought he'd recover well
Third surgery, they couldn't stop the bleeding for real
Then he died, God himself will say, "You fuckin' failed," you ain't try


*Sniffling*


I know your secrets, nigga, mood swings is frequent, nigga
I know depression is restin' on your heart for two reasons, nigga
I know you and a couple block boys ain't been speakin', nigga
Y'all damn near beefin', I see it and you're the reason, nigga
And if this bottle could talk *gulping*
I cry myself to sleep, bitch, everything is your fault
Faults breakin' to pieces, earthquakes on every weekend
Because you shook as soon as you knew confinement was needed
I know your secrets, don't let me tell 'em to the world
About that shit you thinkin' and that time you *gulping*, I'm 'bout to hurl
I'm fucked up, but I ain't as fucked up as you
You just can't get right, I think your heart made of bullet proof
Should've killed yo' ass long time ago
You should've felt that black revolver blast a long time ago
And if these mirrors could talk it'd say, "You gotta go"
And if I told your secrets the world'll know money can't stop a suicidal weakness